The Project Gutenberg eBook of A Ryght Profytable Treatyse Compendiously Drawen Out Of Many and Dyvers Wrytynges Of Holy Men
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A Ryght Profytable Treatyse Compendiously Drawen Out Of Many and Dyvers Wrytynges Of Holy Men

Author: Thomas Betson

Release date: October 2, 2005 [eBook #16779]
                Most recently updated: December 12, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Louise Hope, Internet Archive/Canadian
        Libraries, Robert Cicconetti and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A RYGHT PROFYTABLE TREATYSE COMPENDIOUSLY DRAWEN OUT OF MANY AND DYVERS WRYTYNGES OF HOLY MEN ***




Produced by Louise Hope, Internet Archive/Canadian
Libraries, Robert Cicconetti and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's Note:
Abbreviated words and syllables are shown in [brackets].
  ã,õ,ê,î,û   = vowel with overline (following m or n)
    ¶         = <C> symbol
  [*V*] [*R*] = Verse and Response symbols ]




                       A

           ryght profytable treatyse

        compendiously drawen out of many

              and dyvers wrytynges

                  of holy men


                       by
                 Thomas Betson

           Printed in Caxton's house
              by Wynkyn de Worde
                   about 1500


       *       *       *       *       *


                   Cambridge
            at the University Press

                      1905


The tract here reprinted is one of twenty-six formerly bound together in
a remarkable volume (AB. 4. 58) which was presented to the University in
1715 by King George the First together with the rest of the Library of
John Moore, Bishop of Ely.

The name of the author is only known from the colophon. It will be seen
from the facsimile that the fourth letter of the name is not certainly
an s. Herbert (p. 204) on the information of W. Cole gives the name as
Betton: but it seems probable that we are right in reading it as Betson.
Mr Bernard W. Henderson, who has very kindly examined the copy in the
Library of Exeter College, Oxford, and Mr F. Madan, to whom he has shown
it, are decidedly of opinion that the letter is a blurred s.

The date of printing is fixed by competent authorities as 1500, on the
evidence of the states of the printer's mark and of the cut of the
Crucifixion.

FRANCIS JENKINSON


This facsimile has been taken from the original in the Library of the
University of Cambridge.

I certify that I have printed 250 copies only of this facsimile, that
the impressions have been rubbed off the plates and the negatives
destroyed.

P. DUJARDIN

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

¶ Here begynneth a ryght profytable treatyse cõpendiously drawen
out of many & dyuers wrytynges of holy men / to dyspose men to be
vertuously occupyed in theyr myndes & prayers. And declared the
Pater noster. Aue. & Credo. in our moder tonge with many other
deuoute prayers in lyke wyse medefull to religyous people as to
the laye people with many other moost holsomest Instruccyons / as
here after it shall folowe.

¶ The famous doctour Iohan gerson Chaûceler of Parys / takynge his
groûde of holy scrypture. & accordynge with all other doctours
sayth thus.


[Illuminated O]

Oure moost mercyfull fa[der] lord god knowyng our freelte &
redynes to all s[yn]nes. is euer redy duryng this wretched &
mortall lyf / by many & dyuers ways to forgyue vs our trespace
/ & to graûte & gyue vs his grace / yf so be that truly we ordeyne
vnto hym these treuthes folowynge sayd & done with all our herte.
The fyrst / thou shalt saye. Blessyd lorde I knowleche [that] I
haue synned ayenst thy goodnes thus and thus Rehersynge thy
synnes. And I am dyspleaseth therwith by reason of the whiche I
do penaunce & wyll do. For I knowe well that I haue greued the &
broken thy cõmaûdementes. In the whiche thou only ought to be
worshypped. The seconde saye this treuthe. Good lorde I haue good
purpose & desyre with thyn helpe to be ryght ware herafter that I
fall not in to synne / & I entende to flee the occasions after
[the] possibilyte of my power. The thyrde is this. Mercyful
lorde I haue a good wyll to make an hole confessyon of all my
synnes whan place & tyme cõuenient may be had acordynge to thy
cõmaûdement & all holy chirche. These thre treuthes who soeuer
sayth [with] his herte vnfaynyngly in what place [that] euer it be
/ he may be sure [that] he is in [the] state of helth & grace & he
shal haue euer lastynge lyf though he had done all the synnes of
the worlde. And yf he decessed [with]out ony other confession for
lacke of a preest. as slepyng sodayn deth he sholde be saue
suffrynge afore harde payne of purgatory / wherfor it is a good
coûsel [that] euery crysten man ones or twyes a daye erly or late
/ or els at lest on holy dayes examyne his conscyence & remêbre yf
he may [with] al his herte vnfayn[yn]gly say these thre treuthes /
& yf he do he may be sure [that] he is in [the] state of grace.
And yf he may not. but is in wyll to synne ayen & to haue his
delectacion [with] dede / & wyll not flee the occasyons of mortall
synnes & so drowned wyl not aryse. as vsurers. fals marchaûts or
[that] desyren vengeaûce [with] suche other suche may be certayne
[that] the pope may not assoyle them Not for thy holsom coûsell
is [that] suche praye & gyue almesse & do other good dedes after
theyr power [that] god the father may lyghten theyr hertes. & the
sooner torne them to goodnes. Amen.


¶ This Pater noster / taught our lorde his dyscyples / and all
people by his gospell.

Fader our that art in heuens / halowed be thy name. Thy kyngdom
come to [the]. Thy wyll be do as in heuen so in erthe. Our eche
dayly brede gyue vs to daye. And forgyue vs our dettes ryght as
we forgyue to our dettours. And lede vs not in to temptacyon. But
delyuer vs from euyll Amen / that is to saye. So be it.


¶ This is the Aue maria / that Gabryell sayd salutynge our blessyd
lady / & it is the gospell.

Heyll Mary full of grace / the lorde is with the / blessyd be thou
amonge wymen / & blessyd be the fruyte of thy wombe Ihesus. Amen.


¶ These ben the artycles of our Crede / and oure byleue / that who
is baptysed and trusteth in hem shall be saued.

I byleue in god fa[der] almyghty shaper of heuen & erthe. And in
Ihesu cryste his oonly sone our lorde / the whiche is conceyued of
the holy goost / borne of Mary the mayde / suffred payne & passyon
vn[der] Ponce Pylate. Crucefyed / deed / & buryed / he lyghted
downe to helles. The .iij. daye he arose frõ deth to lyue. He
flyed vp in to heuens. He sytteth at the ryght syde of god the
fa[der] almyghty From thens he is to come to deme both quycke &
deed. I trowe in [the] holy goost / holy chirche vnyuersall /
comunynge of sayntes / forgyuenes of synnes ayen rysynge of
flesshe / & euerlastynge lyf. Amen.

Hope is truste by the mercy of god to be saued. And it standeth in
the grace of our lorde & our good werkes. ¶ Charyte is the ende &
the perfeccion of all the cõmaûdementes of god / and it standeth
in the loue of god aboue all thynges / & thy neyghbour as thy self


¶ These ben the seuen vertues ayenst the seuen vyces.

    ¶ Mekenes ayenst pryde.

¶ As in boostynge / despysynge / scornynge / hyghe herte / fayrnes
/ connynge / strengthe / vertue / pryde of kynne / vayne glory /
dispyte of other / ypocresy.

    ¶ Pacyence ayenst Wrathe.

¶ As fyghtynge / chydynge / hurtyng / betyng / warryeng / cursynge
/ grutchynge / desyre of vengeaûce cruelnes &c.

    ¶ Charyte ayenst Enuye.

¶ As gladde of an other euyll fare / & to be heuy & sory of theyr
welfare / bacbytynge / sowynge of dyscorde / scornynge / and suche
other.

    ¶ Largenes ayenst Couetyse & Auaryce.

¶ In wynnynge / in byenge / in sellynge / in met[yn]ge / in
waynge / gyle / trechery / sacrylege / symony / vsury / theeft /
receyu[yn]ge of stolen goodes / wronge withholdynge of ony dute to
the the chirche &c.

    ¶ Good occupacyon ayenst Slouth.

¶ As ydelnes / delyte in slepe / neclygent to cõne [the] lawes of
god / vnlusty to [the] seruyce of god / myspendynge of tyme /
dyspayre / wanhope & suche other.

    ¶ Abstynence ayenst Glotony.

¶ As in moche etynge & drynkynge / brekynge of faste / desyrynge
of delycate metes & drynkes &c.

¶ These ben the fyue goostly wyttes. Mynde / reason / wyll /
ymagynacyon / vnderstandynge.

¶ These ben the fyue bodely wyttes. Herynge seynge / smellynge /
tastynge / and touchynge.

    ¶ Chastyte ayenst Lechery.

¶ As in thought / wyll / werke / in syght / in felyng in
[pro]uokyng / or synne ayenst kynde [with] many other ¶ The .vij.
goostly dedes of mercy. Teche / coûsel chastyte / comforte /
forgyue / suffre / & praye for thy enemyes. ¶ The .vij. bodely
dedes of mercy. Fede the hongry / gyue drynke to the thursty /
clothe the naked / herborowe the herbourles / comforte the seke /
vysyte prysoners / burye the deed.

¶ These folowynge ben the .vij. gyftes of the holy goost / that
euery man sholde desyre to haue and kepe. Wysdome / counsell /
knowynge / pyte / vnderstandynge / strength / and drede of god.

¶ These folowynge be the .iiij. cardynall vertues

¶ Temperaûce. Is a meane betwix to moche & to lytell / & it
standeth in takynge suffycyently [that] nedeth & in refusyng
[that] is to moche or to lytel vtterly

¶ Ryghtwysnes / is a paynge of a dute to eche th[yn]ge [that]
it duly longeth vnto / as to god praysyng & thãkyng / to thy
neyghbour loue & charyte / & to thyself besynes to fulfyl goddes
wyl & his cõmaûdement[es]

¶ Prudence or Wysdome. Is a vertue [that] departeth good from
euyll / & it standeth in chesynge good & refusynge euyll.

¶ Strength maketh ony myghty and hardy to do grete thynges for
the loue of god & in suffrynge pacyently aduersyte / and mekely
takynge prosperyte.

¶ These ben the .vij. sacrementes of holy cherche Baptysme /
wedloke / the sacrament of [the] awter / cõfirmacõn / ordre /
penaûce / & the last enoyntynge.

¶ Here folowen the .x. cõmaûdement[es] ¶ Worshyp no fals god. In
whiche is forboden wytchecrafte / enchaûtement[es] / mawmentry /
redyng of dremes / & al mysbyleue & such other. ¶ Take not his
name in vayn. In which is forboden all heresyes / forsweryng of
all mysmenyng / vnworshyp of god / tak[yn]ge his name î vayn &
other. ¶ Halowe [the] holydays herynge deuoutly thy seruyce /
kepyng [the] out of dedely s[yn]ne / & visyte [the] poore / &
helpe to acorde them [that] ben at debate & suche other. ¶ Worshyp
thy fa[der] & thy moder. God thy fa[der] holy chirche thy mo[der]
/ thy goostly fa[der]s / thy flesshly fader & mo[der] / & people
of age / & prelates of holy chirche. ¶ Slee no man [with] hande
smytynge / nor [with] thy mouth in bacbytyng with herte cursynge
/ ne wyll ony euyll or vengeaûce. ¶ Do no lechery. In this is
forboden all spousebreche [with] bodely dede or goostly / & all
wylfull polucõns or prouokynge to [the] same. ¶ Do no theeft. as
î stelyng / wronge getyng / trechery / oker / dysherytage of
heyres.wronge amercymêt[es]. fals mesure wrong purchasyng ¶ Bere
no fals wytnes / in this is forboden fals byenge / bacbytyng /
fals accusyng and all such other. ¶ Desyre not thy neyghbours wyf.
In this is not only forboden the dede doyng but also the desyre &
wyll of herte. ¶ Desyre not thy neyghbours thynge / as house /
londe / beest / seruaunt nor ony thynge that is his.

¶ These .vij. thynges folowynge sholde we haue euer in our mynde.

The synnes [that] we dayly do. The short tyme that we shall abyde
here. The vncertayne of the daye of our deth. The vnstablenes &
fraylte of vs. The strayte & ferefull Iugement of god. The bytter
& vnspekable paynes ordeyned for synnes. The euerlastynge losse of
eternall glorye.

¶ Here foloweth a short remêbraûce for confessyon to al peple /
& in especyal to al religious folke.

Seldom shalt [thou] fynde tyme in all the yere in whiche [thou]
shalt not haue cause to shryue the of some of these folowynge /
that is to wete of hasty or neclygence saynge [the] seruyce of
god / or of lesynge of tyme / or els of vayne thought or of vndue
reuerence to god or to our lady or his saynt or to [the] other
[that] ben thy souerayns. Or in forgetynge god & his dayly
benefayt. & not thankyng h[ym] for his creacion & his redempcõn.
& [that] he gaf the [that] mynde to dyspose the better than other
ben [with] suche other. And also not thankynge h[ym] for thy dayly
sustenaunce / clothynge & helth of thy body & for remissyon of thy
synnes / for thyn enherytaûce of heuen [with] other Innumerable.
Also remêbre thy wode wordes or noysom / or els fals Iugementes in
thy mynde / or fals suspycõn. Also of ony mouynge to wrath or to
vayne heuynes or vayne gladnes. Also serche in thy mynde yf [thou]
haue well spended [the] daye & nyght without synne / as yf [thou]
haue prayed or rede to lytell with suche other. Also yf [thou]
haue past thy boûdes in wordes or in etynge or drynkynge /
slepynge or laughynge with suche other. Also remembre how [thou]
haste kepte the maundementes of thy souerayne / chastyte / pouerte
/ sylence in places & houres accordynge as [thou] art called for
to do. Also yf ony persone in worde sygne or dede [thou] haste
offended & gyuen ony cause or occasyon of greuaûce. Remembre also
yf [thou] hast ouerskypped in the seruyce of god ony wordes /
verses / or ony Inclynacyons & suche other. And of the wauerynge
of thy mynde / thyn eyen / & other vnmanerly behauyour of all thy
body. Also of thy vnhonest & noysom thoughtes / that [thou] sholde
miyghtly resyst not taryenge with them by thy wyll. Serche also yf
[thou] haue grutched for mete or drynke or other necessaryes for
bycause they were not gyue to the after thy pleasyr. Loke also yf
[thou] haue synned in moche takynge of mete & drynke / or ony
other necessaryes more than nede requyred &c.


¶ Saynt Bernarde to a newe begynner in relygyon.

Yf [thou] entende to please god & woldest obteyne grace to fulfyll
the same two thyng[es] ben to the necessary. Fyrst thou must
withdrawe thy mynde from all transytory & erthely thynges as who
saye [thou] carest as lytell for them as there were none suche
thynges. The seconde is [that] [thou] gyue thyself to god / that
[thou] saye nor do ony thynge / but that only that [thou] verely
byleuest sholde please god And in this wyse folowynge [thou] mayst
gete grace for the fyrst. In all thynges counte thyself vyle &
symple / and as nothynge in regarde of vertue / & byleue all other
to be good & better than thyself / & so shalt thou moost please
god. What soeuer [thou] here or see of ony relygyous persone or of
ony other good persones / thynke alwaye that all is done & sayd
for good entent though they seme [the] contrary / for oft man by
suspycyon is begyled. Dysplease no creature / & vtter no langage
to laude of thyself / though it were to thy moost famylyer &
beloued felowe / studye euer more to kepe more preuy thy vertue
than thy vyce / speke neuer euyll of ony man or woman though it be
neuer so true / & open it not without it be in confessyon & [that]
whan [thou] can not elles shewe clerely thyn owne confessyon. Be
more gladde to gyue thyn eere whan ony man is praysed / than whan
ony persone is dyspraysed / Whan [thou] spekest haue fewe wordes /
true / & sadde & euer of god / yf ony worldely persone speke
[with] [the] and purpose or vtter vayne wordes / as soone as
[thou] mayst breke out of suche comunycacõn & talkynge & talke
of god & of his vertues / or elles departe & gyue [the] to some
goodly & goostly occupacõn. What soeuer befall the or ony other of
thy frendes gyue no charge of it / yf it be prosperyte reioyse not
therof / yf it be trouble or aduersyte be not sory for it. But
take or acompte all suche thyngs as nought & euer prayse & thanke
god / gyue charge as moche as [thou] mayst to [the] wele &
prosperyte of thy soule flee places of moche speche as moche as
[thou] canst. For it is moche bet[ter] one to kepe his tonge than
to speke. After complyn speke no worde tyl the masse be done the
next daye folowynge without a grete cause requyre. Whan [thou]
seest ony thynge [that] dyspleaseth the / see yf the faute be in
thyself & than haue compassyon / yf it be not / thynke that it may
be & so lete all thynges be to the as it were in a glasse to see
thyself. Grutche not ayenst ony persone without thou see that
[thou] may profyte what soeuer cause [thou] haue. Afferme neyther
denye nothyng ouerthwartly / but lete thy nay or ye or thy doubte
be powdred euer with salt / that is to saye / lete hem be spokan
with discrecion & pacyence. Be euermore ware of mockynge & of
scornynge. Yf [thou] be lyght of contenaûce see it be but selde /
haue thy comunicacion but [with] fewe persones & shortly behaue
thyself so in all thy sayenge that [thou] speke not rather in a
doubte than men sholde take auctoryte or groûde of thy sayenge.
The seconde [thou] mayst obteyne in this wyse. Gyue thyself with
grete deuocyon to praye & lete thyn herte agree with [that] [thou]
sayest both daye & nyght. Remembre also dylygentely that thou
ymagyne the state of them / in whose remembraûce [thou] makest thy
prayer. These thre haue alwaye in thy mynde / what [thou] were /
what [thou] art / & what [thou] shalt be. By reason of thy body /
[thou] were foule slyme of the erthe / & now thy body is the hous
of fylte & derte / & herafter it shall be wormes mete. Also
ymagyne [the] paynes of them [that] ben in helle & how that payne
shall neuer haue ende / & how they suffre all these paynes for a
lytell delectacõn & pleasyr in synne. Also ymagyne the Ioye of
paradyse / & how that shal neuer be fynysshed & how shortly and
soone it may be goten. Than thynke what sorowe & waylynge may be
to them [that] for so lytell a thynge here haue lost so grete Ioye
contynuell. And whan [thou] hast ony thynge that doth dysplease
the / or elles [thou] dredest to haue it / thynke & yf [thou] were
in helle [thou] sholdest haue that / & all that [thou] woldest not
haue / & so shalt [thou] suffre all thynge for crystus sake & his
loue. Also whan [thou] hast ony thynge that pleaseth the / or
elles that [thou] desyrest to haue / thynke & yf thou were in
paradyse [thou] sholdest haue it & all other thynges that thou
woldest desyre. Also whan there falleth ony fest of ony saynt
thynke on h[ym] what payne he suffred here for goddes sake & how
shorte his payne was. Than thynke how greate Ioye he hath in heuen
for that whiche is euerlastynge. And soo thou mayst thynke that
the trybulacion or tourmentynge of the good men is soone gone. And
in lyke wyse the Ioye of euyll men fadeth anone. but good men with
theyr trybulacyon here geteth eternall glorye. And euyll men with
theyr ouermoche Ioye here geteth euerlastynge payne. Furthermore
whan [thou] art accombred [with] slouth & lackest deuocõn / take
this wrytynge & ymagyne dilygently all these thynges rehersed.
Than thynke of the tyme [that] [thou] lesest in vayne ydelnes / &
thynke [that] they that ben in helle wolde gyue all the worlde for
so moche tyme to redeme theyr synnes yf they myght haue it. Whan
[thou] hast ony trouble / thynke that they [that] ben in paradyse
shall neuer haue suche trouble. And whan [thou] hast ony
spirytuell consolacyon or comforte / thynke [that] they that ben
in helle shall euer lacke that. Whan thou goost to bedde or to thy
rest / thynke what [thou] hast thought / what [thou] hast sayd /
what [thou] hast done that daye. And how prouffytable [thou] haste
spende thy tyme / the whiche was gyuen the to spende it vertuously
/ to obteyne euerlastynge lyf. Yf [thou] haue spended it well /
gyue praysynge to god. And yf [thou] haue spended it euyll / wepe
& be sory for it. And the next daye yf thou may / dyfferre not to
be confessed. Yf [thou] haue sayd or done ony thynge that greueth
thy conscyence sore / ete no mete vntyll [thou] be shryuen &
[thou] mayst. Now for a conclusyon / ymagyne in thy mynde two
cytees / one full of trouble & mysery whiche is helle / an other
full of Ioye and comforte whiche is paradyse. And how to one of
these two ye must nedes come. Than thynke in thyself what thynge
sholde cause the to do euyll / or what thynge sholde drawe the fro
god. And I trowe [thou] shalt fynde none suche. I am certayne yf
thou kepe well all these [that] ben wryten here. The holy goost
wyll be with the & teche [the] to kepe them parfytly. Wherfore
kepe well all these preceptes & cõmaûdementes & leue none behynde.
Rede them twyes in the weke / on wensdaye & saterdaye. And as
[thou] fyndest thou hast done as it is wryten. Gyue praysynge to
god / whiche is euer pyteous & mercyfull in worlde withouten ende
Amen.


¶ A deuoute prayer for relygyous people / or for theym that entre
in to relygyon. Remembrynge the termes / and to do theym in dede.

Ihesu my maker & sauyour to thy wyll and ordynaûce I commytte me
euery houre. Besechynge the entyerly for grace & mercy / so that
I may be one of them that shall be saued. Teche me good lorde thy
commaundementes to fulfylle / and to do that I come fore /
eschewynge all euyll. Gyue me grace to loue the and to drede the
aboue all thynge. Remembrynge thy grete benefettes / and euer to
gyue the thankynge. And to kepe euer charyte / obedyence /
pacyence / sylence / with humylyte / demynge euer the best / saye
well / telle the trouthe / and neuer to lye. Lothe to offende /
sory for my synne / and to helpe whan nede is / & to serue the
euer deuoutly with mekenes to haue mede. Of [the] trespaces of
other to haue compassyon / [with] good coûsell example & frendely
consolacyon / & to do after good prechynge & holy saynt[es] lyues
/ kepynge my tonge & conscyence clene & to flee bacbytyng &
stryues / & to gyue none occasyon of greuaûce neuer grutchyng /
& flee ydelnes / & to praye for the deed & quycke alwaye be my
besynes Takynge hede to my charges / & do to them with good wyll
/ gladde to be correcte of eche creature / & to leue myn owne wyll.
And euer to be ware to excuse my s[yn]ne / & to trust in myn owne
wytte. Remêbrynge [that] I come to relygyon for to do penaûce for
synne / & repugne ayenst it / & to crye for mercy to the Ihesu &
to thy moder Mary. In whome I trust & shall serue / & neuer for to
varye Amen.

    [*V*] ¶ D[omin]e fiat voluntas tua.

    [*R*] ¶ Sicut in celo et in terra.

[Sidenote: Oratio]

Acciones n[ostra]s quesum[us] d[omin]e aspirando [pre]ueni et
adiuuando [pro]sequere. vt cûcta n[ostra] operatio a te sem[per]
incipiat. et [per] te cepta finia[tur]. Per [christu]m d[ominu]m
nostrû Amen.


¶ This prayer folowynge is good for them that vnderstande not
theyr seruyce in latyne. in syngynge. or sayenge. or that lacke
deuocyon in tyme of theyr sayd seruyce. and wolde haue it.

Blessyd Ihesu cryst our lorde god & sauyour whiche I knowe well
come in to this worlde not for them that were Iuste & ryghtfull /
but for synners to redeme them by thy deth & shedyng of thy
precyous blood. Now mercyfull & pyteous. lord Iesu cryste forgyue
me & haue mercy of me after thy grete mercyes / & for thy crosse
& bytter passyon. For I am a synner / & haue greuously erred &
offended the. Not for thy swete Ihesu. I byleue in the / & neuer
denyed the nor shall. Attende & beholde good lorde Iesu my fayth &
Intencyon / the vertue of the wordes of holy prayers [that] I
haue sayd / songe / or shall / & beholde not myn Inhabylyte &
Ignoraunce. Wauerynge of mynde & neclygence. But graût of thy
grete goodnes / that the prayers [with] all other good dedes done
by me / or to be done may gracyously profyte me. And them that I
am bounde to praye for / or that haue nede of prayer / Whether
they be lyuynge or deed / to thencreace of thy mercyes laude &
glorye & worshyp of thy blessyd moder Mary & all sayntes Amen.


¶ Thankynges to our lord god for his dayly gyftes & benefaytes /
& is called. Deo gracias.

Almighty & euerlastynge lorde god Ihesu cryst. I worshyp the. I
gloryfye the. I thanke the now & euer shall for the makynge of me
to thy symylytude / gyuynge to me with angelles wytte / reason &
vnderstandynge / and haste redemed me with grete paynes vnto deth
/ shedynge thy precyous blood plenteuously for me / & dayly
defendest me frõ myn enemyes goostly & bodely / preseruynge me to
this tyme by thy grace / both slepyng & wakynge from dyuers
perylles & dethys that other hath fallen in & perysshed. And ouer
these [thou] hast endowed me with thyn holy cõmaundementes & newe
lawes of grace & pyte / with holy sacramentes of the chirche.
And moost in especyall gyuynge vs thy blessyd body & blood for
destruccion of our synnes encreace of vertue & grace / and
synguler comforte to all that ben on lyue and deed. And besydes
these thou hast ordeyned angelles / & all other thy creatures
bothe of heuen & erthe / as sonne and mone / fysshe & foule /
beest and fruyte / with all other Innumerable to serue me. And to
the entente that I sholde loue & serue agayne with all myn herte
deuoutly. And also hast pyteously suffred me whan I haue synned.
Not takynge me thenne to thy strayte Iugement to my dampnacyon
perpetuell. Also I loue the / and thanke the in moost especyall
for that thou hast made me heyre & partener of thy blysse in heuen
perpetuelly / where I trust to see the face to face with the fader
and the holy goost in eternall peas and glorye Amen

¶ For these blessyd Ihesu & other thy benefytes & gyftes Infynyte
I thanke the with all my herte / & I desyre euer to serue the /
to loue the / to worshyp the / & magnyfye the here / and in the
worldes durynge withouten ende. Amen.


¶ A prayer full profytable to them that shal saye masse / & here
masse / or to them that shall be houseled & comunyed / and besyde
for all other that ben on lyue or deed.

Ihesu my lorde god / my loue & oonly comforte / the whiche as
preest moost hyghe & synguler bysshop offered thyself to god thy
fader / an hoste & sacrefyce moost clene & vndefouled on the
crosse for our gylte & redempcyon / & hath gyuen it vnto vs / &
lefte it in remêbraûce of thy grete charyte / deth / & passyon /
and therwith hast cõmaunded vs to ete / & cõmone this gloryous
sacrament of thy blessyd body ymade wonderfully by the vertue of
the holy goost for our dayly helth / freelte / & transgressyon.
wherfore blessyd Iesu / to the be laude and praysynge worlde
withouten end. Amen. ¶ And for as moche that by the holy
ordynaunce the consecracyon therof & offerynge vp to thy hyghe
mageste for the quycke and deed oonly belongeth to the order of
preesthode. For thy good lorde of thy grete pyte & grace. Make thy
seruaût or seruaûtes. ¶ here name ye whom ye wyll that shall saye
masse. N. and all other preestes clene in body and soule. And
delyuer them of all vnclene / wycked vayne / and noysom thoughtes
/ and strengthe them ayenst all theyr enemyes / and vs also with
thy gloryous angelles / and confounde all suche that pursuen them
and vs / and wolde make vs to perysshe fynally. ¶ Ihesu kyng of
virgyns / & louer of chastyte. Remembre how frele that our
substaûce & nature is / & be mercyfull vnto them & vs as fader /
lorde / & god / after thy grete mercy & for thy bytter passyon.
For to the is oonly appropered to be mercyfull / without whiche no
creature may be saued. Beholde swete Ihesu that our wyll is to
worshyp the / & prayse the in the best maner that we can or may
/ and lyke as [thou] haste begonne with vs here / so make vs to
contynue in thyn laude & seruyce euerlastynge. And where it is so
that they knowleche themself vnable to do this heuenly mystery.
For thy good lorde Ihesu / by thy grace make them able / the
whiche of synners haste made full often and dayly makest holy
sayntes. And gyue them also thy drede & clennes of herte with the
ryuer of teeres in all spirytuell consolacyon. Make them to fele &
vnderstande the swetnes of thy blessyd presence / & the grete
attendaunce of thy holy angelles about hem at theyr celebracyons.
Receyue mercyfull Ihesu this hyghe & holy sacryfyce to the comfort
of all [that] ben on lyue & deed / & wouchesauf this daye [that]
it be to vs & to all them a synguler refresshynge & feest / that
we so releued [with] this brede of lyue & lambe Inmaculate /
borne of the blessyd virgyn Mary may Ioye in thy laude & glorye
eternally. Thou saydest by thy holy mouth. The brede [that] I
shall gyve / my body it is / for the lyf of the worlde. Who that
eteth me / he shal lyue for me / & he abydeth in me / & I in hym.
I am the brede of lyf that came downe from heuen. He that eteth of
this brede shall lyue without ende. Now swete brede of lyfe make
both them & vs fele thy swetnes & loue forsakynge all vanytees.
Come in to our soules / & clense vs goostly & bodely / sanctefye
vs Inwarde & outwarde / & be a contynuell defence of soule & body
/ so that we may come to thy kyngdome / there to be fedde of the
with a meruaylous & vnspekable sacyete. Where after we shall neuer
haue hongre ne thurst / seynge the than / not as we now do / in
mysteryes & of ferre home / but thenne shall we see the face to
face in glorye with thy fader in vnyte of the holy goost by all
worldes Amen.

¶ Pater noster. Aue maria.


¶ Here foloweth a prayer to all sayntes / examyned and pardonned.

¶ Ad s[ancta]m mariã.

Gaude m[ater] saluatoris
felix fide flos decor[is]
Mundiq[ue] solacium
Nunc letare celi choris
In hoc festo & languoris
Nostri sis remedium

¶ Ad s[ancto]s angelos.

Gaude michael î hac die
Gabriel raphaelq[ue] messie
Angelo[rum] ordines
Vos precamur nobis pie
Sitis causa melodie
Supra celi cardines

¶ Ad Patriarchas et [pro]phetas.

Gaude ventre [pro]secrat[us]
O baptista mire natus
Sacer degens seculo
Patriarchis sociatus
Et [pro]phetis. vite flatus
Fac finire iubilo

¶ Ad Apostolos et euangelistas.

Gaude petre cû sodali
Paulo. cristo speciali
Lucens orbis climata
Et caterna generali
Vestra sita loco tali
Nos cû eis adiuua

¶ Ad martires.

Gaude thoma spes ãglo[rum]
Et georgi tutor ho[rum]
Cum Edwardo nobili
Tu laurenti rege lo[rum]
Vt tuamur poli cho[rum]
Cum fauore stephani

¶ Ad. s. confessores.

Gaude presul o martine
Nicholae. hugo. line.
Posce nobis graciam
Erkenwalde q[ue] birine
Iam cû tuis augustine
Da supremo gloriam

¶ An. s. virgines.

Gaude virgo katherina
Margareta. magdalena
Cum brigitta. brigida
Anna. fides. et cristina
Nos seruãdo nûc diuina
Gens celo[rum] iubila

[*V*]. Letamini in [domino].

[*R*]. Et gloriamini.

    Oratio.

Concede quesum[us] omnipotentes deus. vt intercessio sancte
dei genitricis marie sancta[rum]q[ue] omnium celestium virtutum.
et beatorum patriarcharum. [pro]phetarum. apostolorum.
euangelista[rum]. martirum. confessorum. atq[ue] virginum. et
omniû electorum tuorum nos vbiq[ue] letificet. vt dum eo[rum]
merita recolim[us] patrocinia senciamus. Per eundê [christum]
[dominum] nostrû. Amen.

    ¶ Here folowen the seuen degrees of humylyte.

¶ Caste thy syght downwarde / and shewe mekenesse / bothe in thy
herte and body.

¶ Beware of hyghe speche & clamorous / and see that thy wordes be
fewe well sette & resonable. Be not lyght for to laugh / but vse
euer sadnesse.

¶ Be stylle & kepe sylence / tyll nede requyre that answere must
be hadde. Kepe well the comyn rule as the holy place hath vsed.

¶ Thynke the moost vylest of all other / & so pronoûce thyself.
Knowlege the vnworthy & not profytable to ony thynge / & to byleue
in dede.

¶ Make ofte confessyon of thy synnes / and that with greate
contrycyon. Kepe pacyence in thy obedyence at all thy paynes &
trouble.

¶ To all people be thou subgette for thy maysters sake / thyn owne
wyll forsake it / and loue it in no wyse.

¶ And euer kepe the from synne / for fere of hym aboue. Amen.

    ¶ Here folowen the seuen degrees of obedyence.

¶ The fyrste is to do that is cõmaûded of thy souereyne without
grutchynge.

¶ The seconde is to make none excepcyon / neyther of the tyme /
neyther of the dede that is to be done.

¶ The thyrde is to be gladde & cherefull in thy herte to do suche
dedes cõmaûded without ony cõpulcyon / settynge a side all beestly
condycyons.

¶ The fourth is to be quycke in suche dede doynge & leuynge all
other occupacyons for that tyme or ony maner of excuse.

¶ The fyfthe is to do suche thynges with all thy myght and power /
thynkynge that thy rewarde shall be grete.

¶ The sixte is to do them also with al mekenesse bothe in spyryte
and gesture.

¶ The seuenth is to contynuye suche obedyence for the ende of thy
lyf / euer folowynge thy mayster Ihesu cryste / that was moost
obedyent for thy synne vnto deth Amen.

    ¶ The seuen degrees of pacyence thou mayst beholde here.

¶ To euyll done to the or aduersyte / make no resystence. ¶ Do no
euyll for euyll / ne gyue an euyl answere. ¶ Loue thyn enmye / &
do good for euyl to hym in recompence. ¶ Grutche not ayenst
aduersyte / but take it as swete as encence. ¶ Accõpt it for best
medycyne / and be gladde in thy payne. ¶ Thanke god therfore / &
loke for more with all benyuolence. ¶ And whan thou hast no
grutchynge in these / thenne meyst thou be fayne.

    ¶ The .xv. degrees of charyte.

¶ These make parfyte charyte after Poules epystle. ¶ Be pacyente
contynuelly for ony aduersyte. ¶ Lyberall to the nedy / & do good
for euyll. ¶ Of other mênes welfare. enuye not ne be heuy ¶ Lette
not by thy crokednesse good werkes to multeplye. ¶ Swelle not
inwarde by malyce yf thy nyghbour prospere. ¶ Loue to be in lowe
degree / & loth to be hye. ¶ To labour for other as thyself do thy
vtter deuour. ¶ Be not moued for ony cause to vêgeaûce or to yre.
¶ Thynke none euyll to another for ony prouocacyon. ¶ Ioye thou
not in wyckednesse but sorowe [thou] rather. ¶ Be gladde in
trought & ryghtwysnesse & hate dyssymulacyon. ¶ For suche ryght
bere aduersyte or ony trybulacõn. ¶ To [that] the chirche techeth
the put ful credulyte. ¶ That god hath promysed trust it well
without defalcatyon. ¶ In hope abydynge his rewarde and
euerlastynge glorye. Amen.


¶ A lytell Instruccõn for them that shall entre in to religyon /
drawen out of the longe rule of sa[yn]t Iherom that he wrote to
saynt Eustochiû &c.

Loue god aboue all thynge / & thy neyghbour as thyself. In these
two is fulfylled all [the] lawe & cõmaûdementes of god & parfyte
charyte [with]out whiche can noman or woman be relygyous & come
to heuen / & the whiche had among them they make theyr place or
monastery a paradyse in erthe & themself professed therin angelles
full pleasaût vnto god. Wherfor amonge [the] spouses of god ben
one wyll / one comfort / one heuynes Remembrynge [that] he is
prynce of peas & charyte. in whom they shalbe wedded vnto. Forsake
[the] desyre of têporall goodes / for better it is to be ryche
with other in the worlde than to be poore in a monasterye & to
haue a desyre to haue god. Blessyd be they sayth our lorde [that]
ben poore in spyryte &c. ¶ The more noble [that] ye ben & come
of worshypfull lynage [the] more ye shal meke your self / & euer
be gladde of poore & vyle habyte or clothynge / beware of
obstentacyon & pryde or to desyre to be better arayed than an
other syster is. And remembre [that] ye shall be professed & wedde
elyke to one spouse Ihesu cryste in one wyl & vowe / whiche loue
none suche syngularyte / pompe & vayne glorye. For in his court
shall not a kynges doughter haue prerogatyf afore an other in
lower degree borne. Goostly lyf requyreth no dignyte temporall /
though all ye be neuer so meke / yet your spouse was & is moche
more meker. See in your mynde how [that] sa[yn]t Peter was a poore
fyssher / and Bartylmew a noble man of byrth. Netheles Peter was
preferred & made prynce of Bartylmew & of all the worlde. Beware
of grutchynge [that] whiche gretly dyspleaseth god. Commende neuer
your self of ony goodes gyuen or to be gyuen of you or by yours to
[the] monasterye or els where / but euer lerne & vse you to take
[the] crosse & to folowe your spouse in penaûce / & do that ye
come for / kepynge obedyence / pacyence / mekenesse / sylence /
prayer / fastynge / & suche other as your relygyon wyll gyue you
Instruccyon. And in ony wyse shewe mekenesse in your langage /
countenaûce & all other behauyour / & in especyall to your heed &
souerayne / the whiche representeth cryste your spouse / & that in
all obedyence / drede / loue / & reuerence. Neuer disputynge of
theyr wyll or of other that be your souerayns / but thynke [that]
all is ryghtfull [that] they do / presume not to correcte theyr
Iugementes. For as by example yf eche man sholde haue the guydynge
of a shyppe [that] they be within / it sholde neuer prospere ne
come to the hauen [that] it desyred. And as ye be professed deed
to the worlde so be ye deed in other mennes dedes. ¶ Also remêbre
that ye must forsake your owne wyll & offre it vp & gyue it to
god & to them that shall be your souerayne & heed for euer more.
Enforce eche one of you that shall come to religyon to passe an
other in obedyence / for than doubtles ye shall please god A true
obedyencer that hath vtterly forsaken his owne wyll / knowe not
ony thynge harde to do [that] is cõmaunded of theyr souerayne ne
ony thynge vnryghtfull. ¶ Beware of ydelnes the whiche is moder of
all synne & vnclennesse / so that by your offyce that ye be called
to / or by prayer / redynge / wrytynge / sewynge / or other
handewerkes doynge / ye may make your bodyes dayly wery &
crucyfyed. And therby make your spyrytes the more quycke and apte
to the seruyce of our lorde in confusyon of your enemye and
encreace of glorye. ¶ Beware to be Inquysytyf / or to muse on
hyghe maters and subtyll. And leue them to worldely people /
and to clerkes / for otymes the letter may hurte you Thynke euer
[that] ye had leuer dye than ones to passe the clausures or boûdes
of your monasterye. Yf ye haue a faythfull & a Iuste frende / to
whom ye may open [the] secretes of your herte / than ye haue a
grete tresour / for oftymes one shall be deceyued & seldome can
iuge the trouth in his owne maters so well as other. Knowe your
owne synnes & wayle them & medle [with] none other. Beware euer of
detraccion & flee it as it were a venemous serpent / [that] the
speker therof be your contenaûce & departynge from them may be
ashamed / & therwith lothe for euer so to speke or do. Moreouer yf
ye wyll see your spouse Ihesu cryst in your mynde by contemplacõn
euer kepe your sylence. For saynt Ierom sawe many in Egypt amonge
holy faders that .vij. yeres togyder spake not owne worde / but
only to god & to his saynt. Yf the caas be so [that] ye must
speke / lete it be in all peas & charyte & [with] fewe wordes.
Remembrynge [that] your spouse loueth no voyde claterynge / but
wolde be [with] you alone in all quyetnesse in your soules.
Wherfore be ye aferde to dysplease hym or to dryue hym out from
you [with] stryues or debate / sclaundres / othes / and suche
other / ¶ Saynt Iames coûselleth eche man to refrayne his tonge /
sayenge that lyf & deth ben in the power of [the] same tonge /
wrytynge thus. Who that refrayneth his tonge he shalbe blessyd in
all dedes &c. Knowleche your self at all tymes carayne and erthe /
& the glory therof is as a floure in the medowe. Absteyne you as
pylgryms from all desyres of [the] flesshe / the whiche dayly
bataylleth ayenst the soule. Absteyne also from lyes at all tymes
/ as ye wolde from helle / for them in no wyse loueth Ihesus your
spouse. And also beware to mayntene or botrace suthe lyes whiche
is abhomynable in the syght of god. Yf there come ony straûger
vnto you / lete hym knowe by your heuenly talkynge & behauyour
[that] ye be a well taught spouse of cryste & [that] they may
glorefye in you & for you & be amended by you. Bere [the] wordes
of saynt Ierom in your mynde that sayth thus. Truste me verely
[that] theris no thynge more peryllous to a man. than is a woman /
& to a woman no thynge more contagyous than is a man / for eyther
of them is chaff & eyther is fyre. And note this for a truth /
[that] preuy talkyng lacketh no suspycyon. That thynge is not
lefull to be seen / [that] is not lefull to be desyred. More than
ony man can suppose or wryte / [the] deuyll reioyseth whan memorye
of o man is fixed & had in a womãnes herte. There is no venym in
the worlde so noysom to woman as is affeccõn towarde man of what
soeuer cause it procede or growe. Ye may see [that] the desyre of
worldly wymen is euer in vesture / golde / precyous stones / &
ornament outwarde of the body / & therin they put theyr glorye &
felycyte. In so moche [that] it suffyseth not them theyr luste
gyuen by nature only / but they seke occasyon & craft by the sayd
premysses to encreace theyr sayd luste & desyres to theyr grete
dampnacõn / beware ther fore of ony costely habyte or suche
vanytees &c. Certaynly sayth the sayd saynt Ierom / [the]
pryncypall desyre is of suche wymen [that] men sholde fest theyr
eyen in [the] faces of them by the prouocacõn & syght of theyr
precyous arraye. But they sholde cõsyder though nature hath gyuen
to golde / & suthe other a precyosyte wherby they ben praysed /
what is [that] to the vyle carkas [that] it hangeth vpon / the
whiche is but a sachell of dounge brought forth of vnclene seed &
fynally shall be wormes mete.


¶ The wordes of saynt Ierom.

O Thou moost vylest & worse than ony beest how shamefast sholdest
[the] be in thy body yf thou woldest beholde thyself / [that] so
in thyn arraye auaûcest thyself. And this blessyd Ierom sayth. I
take them for no relygyous wymen [that] ben cladde in costlyous
araye or in a wanton & pynched habytes but he calleth them in
latyn. Pessimas meretrices et storta. Wherfore desyre ye to go in
vyle & vnshapely vesture. that wanton & dissolute persones may
rather be prouoked to scorne & laughe at you than to thynke euyl
or desyre you / for they say not trouthe that do ensure themself
with a glorye to kepe chastyte in a costely or ony shapely vesture
/ ye shal be called ladyes / for bycause that ye shall be spoused
to the kyng of all kynges. Beware than & take hede with all
mekenesse to your dygnyte / in lesse than your spouse be greued &
make a deuorce & to departe from you. Yf that ye wyst & ones had
tasted how swete your spouse were. ye sholde haue pleasyr ynough
that passeth all worldly pleasyrs. This Ioye & pleasye had saynt
Ierom & many other both of men & wymen / kepe the mansyon of
your spouse clene / & garnysshe it with floures of vertue / and
accompte your self moost vyle & outcaste of this worlde. Remembre
also how in your baptysme ye forsoke the worlde / the enuye / and
all theyr pryde & glory / the whiche now ye shall cõferme vnder
[the] grettest othe that may be / & therwith receyue our lorde god
in sacramêt in this your fyrste entrynge in to religyon. Beware
also of vayne glory / lyftynge vp your vysage & voyce on hyghe as
wymen done in the worlde. Rebukyng other or to speke of your noble
blood or kynrede / for in the spousage and seruyce of god / the
poorest mannes doughter lyuynge shall be egall & lyke to the
gretest kynges doughter lyuynge in erthe. Ye muste forsake all
suche worldely pompe & vanyte & take a newe & a more sure noble
dignyte by your spouse Ihesu cryst that neuer shall haue ende /
the poorest of you bryngeth more to the monastery / so that ye
come with a meke herte and in wyll to forsake yf that ye hadde
neuer so moche / than she that bryngeth moche with a proude herte
/ and therwith to other wolde haue it knowen. Beware euer that no
foule worde or stryue be amonge you [that] ben deed folke in this
worlde. But euer thynke [that] the trompe of the last daye of
Iugement soundeth in your eeres / and calleth you sayenge. Ryse
doughters Ryse / & come to your Iugement. Lete euer your mynde
be with your spouse / and with your moder blessyd Marye / & the
sayntes as often as ye synge or rede. Remembrynge [that] god is
there present and seeth what ye do Lete none see you from the
seruyce of god or vnoccupyed. In redynge of prophetes epystles /
gospelles / sayntes lyues / & other dedes of vertue doynge /
hauynge euer bokes in your handes / studyenge or wrytynge / [that]
people seynge you may saye. Beholde here the seruaût of god / &
the lanternes of the worlde. Beware also of glotony whiche is
moder of all vnclennesse & bocheres of chastyte / & kepe your
stomake rather voyd than to take to it superfluyte wherthorugh ye
shall not nede to take medicynes for a digestyon. Vse curtesly to
ete & not gredely nor hastely / for therin may ye synne. It is
wryten in the lyf of saynt Benet [that] a religious woman [with] a
gredenes receyued a wycked spiryte in etynge of letuse in [the]
gardeyn. Also they [that] vse to dr[yn]ke wyne go not [with]out
fyre î theyr bosom. And euer beware of dronkenshyp / remenbrynge
[that] abstynence & fastynge is a sure medycyne for all sekenes.
And by them cometh grete vertue & grace. Not for thy beware of
vndiscrete abstynence / whiche myght cause you to haue payne here
& in tyme to come. Whan tyme is of redyng at your meles & repast
or ony other good doctryne than beware of speche or laughynge /
but take hede to [the] lecture. And knocke pryuely your brestes &
that yf ye may with fallynge of teeres / after your meles reherce
your lectures or some notabilytees of sermons or other holy
thynges [that] ye haue herde or seen afore. And whan ye praye be
sory for the Ignoraûce of the people & theyr synnes / & mynde the
soules that ye be specyally boûde to praye for with all other
crysten soules. And yf ye wyl haue [the] swetenes of contemplacõn
/ clense your herte from all worldly thynges. And be as ye were
deed amonge them & as ye were buryed in your sepulcre the whiche
betokeneth your monastery / to the tyme ye aryse & appere afore
your spouse to haue your rewarde of his glory. Whan ye shal go to
your garden & seen the herber & grene trees smellynge [the]
floures & fruytes with theyr swetnesse / meruaylle the grete power
of god in his creatures / & thenne labour & engendre in your mynde
/ or talkynge of deuocõn & lyfte vp your herte to heuen / & thynke
verely [that] the maker of them that is your spouse in heuen is
vnspekable fayre / swete / delectable / and gloryous. But beware
touche there nothynge to a vayne vse or nycete of the worlde.
After complyne kepe your tonge & take you to prayer &
contemplacion. And call to your mynde suche heuenly thynges that
ye haue herde or redde afore. See in ony wyse that ye kepe this
poynt of goddes lawe & of [the] lawe of nature. Do euer to an
other as ye wolde be done vnto

    ¶ Deo gracias.

¶ Thyse short prayers folowynge taught our lorde saynt Brigytte.
Saye ye them ofte in the daye.

Domîe i[hes]u [christ]e. ego cognosco me graui[ter] peccasse. Et
libenter volo emêdare [per] gr[atiam] tuã Miserere mei [pro]pter
amarã passionê tuã. D[omin]e i[hes]u [christ]e. Redemisti nos in
sanguîe tuo. Laus sit tibi [pro] amara passione tua.

¶ Pater n[oster]. Aue maria.


¶ Also vse for to saye dayly knelynge in remembraûce of the
passyon of our lorde & his fyue woûdes / & of the grete compassion
of our blessyd lady .v. Pater noster / and .v. Aue maria. & a
Credo.

¶ Deus propicius esto michi peccatori. Ihesu fili dei miserere mei
et tocius populi cristiani.

    ¶ Semper deo gracias.


¶ Praye for your broder Thomas Betton which for your soules
[that] be come or shall come in to relygyon / drewe and made
the contentes of this lytell quayer & exhortacion. necessary &
nedefull to them that ben come & shall come to relygyon.

    ¶ Lerne to kepe your bokes clene &c.


[Illustration (Caxton imprint)]

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

[Errors and Problems Noted by Transcriber: grouped by type

the pope may not assoyle them
  _text changed by hand to_ he may not be assoyled

as soone as [thou] mayst breke out of suche comunycacõn
Than thynke how greate Ioye he hath in heuen
I thanke the with all my herte
  _text reads_ brebe, thyn be, thanbe

Takynge hede to my charges
the comfort of all [that] ben on lyue & deed
borne of the blessyd virgyn Mary
wymen [that] ben cladde in costlyous araye
Lerne to kepe your bokes clene &c.
  _text reads_ Takyuge, on lyne, borue of, beu cladde, cleue &c.

Accõpt it for best medycyne
  _text reads_ Acccõpt

And also hast pyteously suffred me whan I haue synned.
  _text unclear: probably_ surrfed

Here foloweth a prayer to all sayntes / examyned and pardonned.
  _reading of_ pardonned _uncertain_

Gaude ventre [pro]secrat[us]
  _reading of_ [pro]secrat[us] _uncertain: may be_ obsecratus

Gaude thoma spes ãglo[rum]
  _reading_ thoma _uncertain_

Kepe pacyence in thy obedyence at all thy paynes & trouble.
  _one or more letters may be missing between_ thy _and_ obedience_

Praye for your broder Thomas Betton
  _name uncertain; see Editor's introduction_ ]







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A RYGHT PROFYTABLE TREATYSE COMPENDIOUSLY DRAWEN OUT OF MANY AND DYVERS WRYTYNGES OF HOLY MEN ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


