The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Vicomte de Bragelonne: The End and Beginning of an Era
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Vicomte de Bragelonne: The End and Beginning of an Era

Author: John Bursey

Release date: January 1, 2002 [eBook #3010]
                Most recently updated: January 9, 2022

Language: English

Credits: Dudley P. Duck


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VICOMTE DE BRAGELONNE: THE END AND BEGINNING OF AN ERA ***




The Vicomte de Bragelonne

The End and Beginning of an Era

by John Bursey




The Vicomte de Bragelonne is a different sort of novel from the
preceding volumes in the D’Artagnan Romances. In The Three Musketeers
and Twenty Years After, we find our four heroes battling against evil
forces with a combination of stunning swordplay, unmatched bravado,
unbelievable ingenuity, and several strokes of great fortune. Their
famous cry, “All for one and one for all!” has echoed throughout the
imagination for 150 years. Movies are still being made from the
stories, they still appear in television commercials, they have their
own candy bar, and some current authors have even lent their talents to
filling in the gaps between the novels. The swashbuckling exploits of
the “four invincibles,” as they are referred to in the novels, have
made them sell consistently for a century and a half, a feat not
achieved by many authors. The popularity of the stories, first as
magazine serials and then as novels, made Dumas the most famous
Frenchman of the age. The heroes and villains are clearly defined, and
it is never difficult for the readers to know who to cheer for as the
drama unfolds in the theater of the mind.

Dumas himself resembled, as much as one could in the 19th Century, his
swashbuckling heroes. Before he embarked on the series, he was already
considered one of, if not the, greatest dramatists in France. He had
fought in one of the many revolutions in France at that time, and would
later run guns in an Italian revolution. His unerring sense of drama
had brought him theatrical acclaim the world over, and when he switched
to novels, that same sense never steered him wrong. For the entirety of
the D’Artagnan Romances, he had a collaborator, named Maquet, who did
much of the historical research. But the many charges leveled against
Dumas that he ran a literature “factory” are blatantly false. Once he
got his historical framework, Dumas injected the story with his own
energy and breathed life into it, many times ignoring the strict
dictates of historical fact for the necessity of crafting the drama as
he saw fit. Indeed, The Three Musketeers and Twenty Years After bear
many structural similarities. There are clear villains (Milady, De
Wardes, Richelieu, Mordaunt, Mazarin) and clear heroes and heroines,
great men destined for demise, despite our heroes’ efforts (Buckingham,
Charles I), and yet our four heroes must triumph against all odds,
united until the end.

But the clearest difference in this third volume is that our heroes are
no longer united. Though inseparable in their youth, now Aramis, with
the unwitting Porthos in tow, is plotting against the king, who
D’Artagnan has sworn with his life to defend. Athos, once the most
upright defender of nobility, is now forced to break his sword before
his monarch, and renounce the sacred vow he pledged with his son in
Twenty Years After to respect royalty in all its forms. Never, even, do
the four come face to face in the course of the entire novel. Time has
sent them in different directions, and managed to separate them when
constant villains in the course of forty years have failed.

Dumas uses this division of his heroes to skillfully insert his own
opinions on that phase of French history, which in many ways paralleled
the time he lived in himself. Although Dumas’s distinct storytelling
talents are as evident as in the former novels, Dumas sets the twilight
of his characters in the dawn of a new age, exploiting the contrast as
a form of social commentary. The four former musketeers are now drawn
to each represent a virtue. D’Artagnan is Loyalty, Athos is Nobility,
Porthos is Strength, and Aramis is Cunning. When Louis XIV dishonors
Raoul and casts off Athos, he sheds the ideal of Nobility as he in
reality broke the power of the French nobles and brought the entire
country under his control. When he tames D’Artagnan, as Aramis and
Porthos are fighting for their lives at Belle-Isle, he symbolically
gains the Loyalty of his servants, which he would keep during his long
reign. When Porthos meets his demise at Belle-Isle, Strength is no
longer a virtue prized in France, as Industry (in the form of Colbert)
and Cunning (in Aramis) now become the hallmarks of the time. When
Fouquet falls, so does Generosity. When Louis takes Louise as his
mistress, condemning Raoul to his death, Fidelity dies with the poor
young cavalier as Innocence is corrupted. As D’Artagnan, Raoul, Athos,
and Porthos meet their ends, and only Aramis is left alive, Dumas
indicates the death of these noble virtues in France, virtues that he
urged his contemporaries to assume again in his own time.

This new generation that comes with the ascension of Louis XIV is,
indeed, pale in comparison to the times in which the four musketeers
had their great exploits. D’Artagnan and Athos are endlessly commenting
on these youngsters, always unfavorably, and they are generally
accurate. Raoul, the true son of Athos, and the symbolic son of the
four, is never as quick to draw his sword as D’Artagnan would have been
at that age, though he is equally as skillful in its use. Although he
loses his one true love, Louise, as D’Artagnan did forty years ago,
Constance, this loss kills the younger hero. He is more thoughtful,
more sensitive, and thereby weaker. The villains, too, are watered
down. De Wardes, certainly the most “evil” character in the novel,
pales in comparison with the great villains D’Artagnan and his friends
had to face. Colbert, though ugly, ill-humored, and set to ruin the
kind, generous, affable Fouquet, is actually a blessing in disguise,
and it is through his “great works” that France is ready to rise to
ever-greater glory in the coming reign. The Chevalier de Lorraine,
always a disruptive influence, is checked not through confrontation or
daring intrigue, but by artful court maneuvering. De Guiche, Raoul’s
loyal friend, and as consummate a nobleman of the new reign as one
might expect to find, is more concerned with his love affairs and his
own happiness than his role in safeguarding Raoul’s honor. Though he
does fight De Wardes in the only illegal duel in the novel, he loses,
and does nothing to help Raoul when the king’s treachery is discovered.
And age has affected the four heroes, too. D’Artagnan pulls off his
masterstroke in England not with his four friends by his side and sword
drawn, as he did in the former novels, but with stealth and cunning. He
defeats De Wardes not by a duel, which would be his ordinary mode of
operation, but by outwitting him. The only scenes that are reminiscent
of the times of former glory are the riot at the execution, where
D’Artagnan, with Raoul by his side, defeats a whole mob, and Aramis and
Porthos’s desperate final stand in the grotto. But even these are
tainted; D’Artagnan’s action ends up going against the values he would
have prized, had he known the truth, and the events in the grotto cost
Porthos his life.

But these differences in the times and the changes in our heroes as
they age do not detract from the work, but rather enrich it. It is a
more mature novel than its predecessors, richer in detail due to the
slower pacing. The mood, too, is much darker, especially towards the
end, when we know that impending doom is approaching for Raoul, as his
love affair unravels, and for Aramis and Porthos as their plot is
detected. And, of course, the mystery of the man in the iron mask,
around which the latter portions of the book are based, is one of the
most dark and sinister mysteries in all history. The characters, though
they each defend an abstract ideal, are as rich and vivid as they ever
were, if not more so, and the depth of emotion that Dumas explores is
much wider than in the two earlier books. Porthos was modeled on
Dumas’s own father, and legend has it that the author wept for three
days as he was writing the death of that gentle giant. Many readers
experience the same, no matter how many times they may have read that
passage. Even Aramis, according to Dumas, was moved to shed his first
and only tears. Anyone who has ever loved and lost can feel Raoul’s
pain, and any parent can understand Athos’s anguish as he sees his son
off to certain death. No longer are characters simply good or simply
evil, they are their own entities, sometimes good, sometimes evil. The
Duchesse de Chevreuse, once Aramis’s close friend and contact at court,
the mother of Raoul, now schemes against Aramis, hoping to bring about
his downfall. Queen Anne of Austria, once the beautiful, helpless
heroine, is now the ailing, sometimes imperial, matriarch of the royal
household, tortured by the son she was forced to forsake. In other
words, they are human. The refinement of the four principles, as age
steals upon them, adds an element that is somehow lacking from the
former books. They now hail from different spheres, which lends
richness to their portrayal. Aramis is the man of God, with a scheme
always in the works. Athos is the dignified, retired nobleman, whose
only concerns are debts left unpaid and the launching of his son into
the world. Porthos is a great baron, ever ready to help, ever seeking
another title, ever seeking the noble airs that were not his
birthright, but to which he came upon his wife’s death. And D’Artagnan
is a hardened soldier, casting a cynical eye everywhere, still loyal,
but somewhat embittered, trading in his customary “mordioux!” for the
“bah!” more common to old men.

The character of D’Artagnan is, of course, the focus of the Romances.
Dumas frequently admitted that D’Artagnan was the man he could never
be. In The Vicomte de Bragelonne, the character expands even further.
Although his primary symbolic representation is that of the virtue of
Loyalty, he is not devoid of other virtues. He has his share of
Cunning, Nobility, and Strength, as well as the virtues of the other
characters. He’s a sort of Everyman, superior in every respect, and the
only man that can tame him is Louis, the greatest French monarch of
them all. The scene in which D’Artagnan goes to the scene of the duel
between De Wardes and De Guiche, and from the forensic evidence manages
to piece together the details exactly, predates the classic detective
fiction that was becoming popular in the States with Edgar Allen Poe’s
murders in the Rue Morgue. He has learned to maneuver in royal circles
with infinite grace and delicacy, and until the end he boasts that he
can always make the king do what he wants. Even outside the D’Artagnan
Romances, he has gotten around. He’s found his way onto the big screen
countless times, most recently in two major films in the 1990s. He’s
found his way onto the stage, not only in Dumas’s own adaptations of
the Musketeers saga, but as a walk-on character in Cyrano de Bergerac
by Rostand, for example. Many talented authors, in many different ages,
have lent their pens to continuations to the saga. Paul Feval and a M.
Lassez wrote a series of eight novels based on the adventures of
D’Artagnan with a young Cyrano de Bergerac. These are supposedly tales
of Grimaud’s, Athos’s servant, related to Athos, and Aramis even makes
an appearance. Roger Nimier’s last book was D’Artagnan amoureux, set
shortly after The Three Musketeers. He had planned more in the series,
but unfortunately died in 1956. The 1993 winner of le Prix Interallie
was a novel entitled Le dernier amour d’Aramis by Jean-Pierre
Dufreigne, which focuses on Aramis, the most mysterious of the four and
the one whose past remains the greatest mystery. Although Dumas’s
portrayal of the character of D’Artagnan is the most famous, it was not
the first. Dumas got much of his initial material from a book written
by a soldier, Courtilz de Sandras, who supplemented his income by
writing historical fictions. He published his fictional Memoirs of M.
d’Artagnan in 1700, and Dumas, after reading the first volume, used
much of the material as his basis for the first part of The Three
Musketeers. The real D’Artagnan, although he was Captain-Lieutenant of
the musketeers, and he did arrest Fouquet and escort him to prison, was
far from the dashing hero Dumas made him. As for the other characters,
particularly Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, they also appeared in this
fictional memoir, and lacking even the scant details about them that
subsequent historians have managed to bring to the light of day,
Dumas’s ever-fertile imagination made them three of the most famous men
in history.

As a closing, instead of more of my thoughts on the novels, I instead
quote what Robert Louis Stevenson wrote about The Vicomte de
Bragelonne: “My acquaintance with the VICOMTE began, somewhat
indirectly, in the year of grace 1863, when I had the advantage of
studying certain illustrated dessert plates in a hotel at Nice. The
name of d’Artagnan in the legends I already saluted like an old friend,
for I had met it the year before in a work of Miss Yonge’s. My first
perusal was in one of those pirated editions that swarmed at that time
out of Brussels, and ran to such a troop of neat and dwarfish volumes.
I understood but little of the merits of the book; my strongest memory
is of the execution of d’Eymeric and Lyodot—a strange testimony to the
dulness of a boy, who could enjoy the rough-and-tumble in the Place de
Grêve, and forget d’Artagnan’s visits to the two financiers. My next
reading was in winter-time, when I lived alone upon the Pentlands. I
would return in the early night from one of my patrols with the
shepherd; a friendly face would meet me in the door, a friendly
retriever scurry upstairs to fetch my slippers; and I would sit down
with the VICOMTE for a long, silent, solitary lamp-light evening by the
fire. And yet I know not why I call it silent, when it was enlivened
with such a clatter of horse-shoes, and such a rattle of musketry, and
such a stir of talk; or why I call those evenings solitary in which I
gained so many friends. I would rise from my book and pull the blind
aside, and see the snow and the glittering hollies chequer a Scotch
garden, and the winter moonlight brighten the white hills. Thence I
would turn again to that crowded and sunny field of life in which it
was so easy to forget myself, my cares, and my surroundings: a place
busy as a city, bright as a theatre, thronged with memorable faces, and
sounding with delightful speech. I carried the thread of that epic into
my slumbers, I woke with it unbroken, I rejoiced to plunge into the
book again at breakfast, it was with a pang that I must lay it down and
turn to my own labours; for no part of the world has ever seemed to me
so charming as these pages, and not even my friends are quite so real,
perhaps quite so dear, as d’Artagnan.

“Since then I have been going to and fro at very brief intervals in my
favourite book; and I have now just risen from my last (let me call it
my fifth) perusal, having liked it better and admired it more seriously
than ever. Perhaps I have a sense of ownership, being so well known in
these six volumes. Perhaps I think that d’Artagnan delights to have me
read of him, and Louis Quatorze is gratified, and Fouquet throws me a
look, and Aramis, although he knows I do not love him, yet plays to me
with his best graces, as to an old patron of the show. Perhaps, if I am
not careful, something may befall me like what befell George IV. about
the battle of Waterloo, and I may come to fancy the VICOMTE one of the
first, and Heaven knows the best, of my own works. “

So many readers have thought the same over the last century and a half,
and many more will in the times to come. Like Dumas itself, the work
has many flaws. There are errors in history, chronology, and in some
places Dumas even writes the wrong year or gets confused about a
character’s age. Dumas always cared more about the drama, the suspense,
the history he was creating, rather than the sometimes boring facts of
actual history. He took his historical sketch and filled it out from
his own imagination, creating characters whose actions changed history
within the novels, and who have enlivened history ever since.


There has been much confusion over the years as to which books form the
“Musketeers Series” or the D’Artagnan Romances, as they are referred to
by scholars. The greatest confusion lies in the manner in which editors
split the lengthy third volume of the series. The title of the whole
work is The Vicomte de Bragelonne, however, its subtitle is Ten Years
Later, and so some older editions use that as the title. Also, the
novel is split into three, four, or five volumes, depending on the
edition. When split into three volumes, the titles are: The Vicomte de
Bragelonne, Louise de la Valliere, and The Man in the Iron Mask. In
four volumes the titles are: The Vicomte de Bragelonne, Ten Years
Later, Louise de la Valliere, and The Man in the Iron Mask. The copies
of The Man in the Iron Mask that are sold in bookstores today
correspond to the last volume of the four-volume edition. The
five-volume editions rarely give separate titles to the volumes. Also
adding to the confusion is the fact that Dumas considered The Three
Musketeers to be two books: The Three Musketeers and The Four
Musketeers. The split occurs, naturally, shortly after D’Artagnan is
made a musketeer. Some older editions split this book in this fashion.
Also, there are two other books that feature the characters of the
D’Artagnan Romances that are, however, falsely attributed to Dumas.
These two titles are D’Artagnan and the King-Maker and The Son of
Porthos. Not only do these novels outright contradict the earlier books
in the series, but they were clearly not written by Alexandre Dumas.
Many catalogues, however, list them among Dumas’s works. Most commonly,
though, the entire D’Artagnan Romances are found in five books, with
The Vicomte de Bragelonne being split into three volumes. Here is a
listing of them in chronological order, with possible subdivisions
listed in parenthesis:

The Three Musketeers — serialized 1844
(The Four Musketeers)
Twenty Years After — serialized 1845
The Vicomte de Bragelonne — serialized 1847–1850
(Ten Years Later)
Louise de la Valliere
The Man in the Iron Mask


For the purposes of the Project Gutenberg etexts, The Vicomte de
Bragelonne was split into four texts, using the same divisions as the
four-volume editions. However, another text exists, entitled Ten Years
Later, which was published by Project Gutenberg before Twenty Years
After, even though it occurs later in the story. While it is correct in
claiming that it is a sequel to The Three Musketeers, it neglects to
acknowledge that Twenty Years After comes between The Three Musketeers
and that etext. This etext also, like some novel editions, uses the
title Ten Years Later to refer to The Vicomte de Bragelonne as a whole,
and it covers portions of the etexts The Vicomte de Bragelonne and the
newer Ten Years Later.


What follows are some short biographical details about the real
personages behind the characters created by Dumas. Although some of
them do not appear in The Vicomte de Bragelonne, they are referred to
frequently, and so they were included.

Anne of Austria: (1601-66) Anne was the daughter of Phillip III of
Spain. She married Louis XIII in 1615, and after his death, ruled as
Regent from 1643–61 with Mazarin as her prime minister. Modern
historians reckon that she was almost certainly Mazarin’s lover, but no
evidence beyond rumor exists of a secret marriage between the two, as
Dumas suggests. She died of breast cancer in 1666, though symptoms of
her disease did not appear until 1664. She was supposedly in love with
the elder Buckingham in around 1646, but nothing suggests that she was
actually his mistress, though many thought so. She was, though, in her
youth, one of the greatest beauties of all Europe.

Aramis: Aramis’s real name was Henri d’Aramitz. Like his fictional
counterpart, he was a clergyman, a Bernais, and like D’Artagnan, he was
a Gascon. He joined the musketeers in 1640, married in 1654, had four
children, and died around 1674. He was a nephew to M. de Tréville,
captain of the musketeers from 1634–1642. He was never, so far as
history can tell, involved with the Jesuits. A German named Nickel was
Vicar-General from 1652–1664 and from 1664–1681 an Italian named
Jean-Paul Oliva headed the order.

Athos: Athos was, in real life, Armand de Sillegue d’Athos d’Auteville.
He was born around 1615, joined the musketeers at the age of
twenty-five, and died in Paris in 1643. He was probably a nobleman, as
Athos was, and was a Gascon, as D’Artagnan was, and was also a cousin
to M. de Tréville, captain of the musketeers from 1634–1642. Dumas
claimed, in the preface to The Three Musketeers, to be nothing more
than the editor of the memoirs of the Comte de la Fere, presumably the
same memoirs Athos is seen working on during the course of The Vicomte
de Bragelonne.

Baisemeaux: (1613?–97) Francois de Montlezun joined the musketeers in
1634 where he served with our four heroes’ historical counterparts. He
purchased the post of governor of the Bastile in 1658 for forty
thousand livres, not one hundred and fifty thousand as Dumas claims,
and held the post until his death. He left a fortune of two million
livres.

Beaufort: (1616–69) Francois de Vendome, the Duc de Beaufort, was a
grandson of Henry IV. and Gabrielle d’Estrees. He was jailed in
Vincennes in 1643 for plotting against Mazarin, and he escaped in 1648
(with the aid of Athos and Grimaud according to Twenty Years After).
After fighting against the king in the Fronde, he reconciled with the
throne in 1653. He died at the siege of Candia.

Belliere: (1608–1705) Suzanne de Bruc, Marquis de Plessis-Belliere,
called Elise by Dumas, was widowed in 1654. She was very close to
Fouquet, and it was she who organized his social engagements, not
Madame Fouquet. When Fouquet was arrested in 1661, she was kept under
house arrest until 1665.

Bragelonne: Dumas’s source for the character Raoul de Bragelonne comes
from a slight mention of a suitor of Louise de Valliere’s while she was
still at Blois. The most likely candidate is Jean de Bragelonne, who
was an obscure councilor at the parliament at Rennes. However, there
were several other Bragelonnes who were also in the area: Jerome, his
son Francois, both soldiers, and Jacques, Gaston d’Orleans’s chief
steward. Jean was more than likely related to one of these other
Bragelonnes, but historians are not certain as to which.

Buckingham: (1627–87) George Villiers, the second Duke of Buckingham,
was the son of the George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, who figured so
prominently in The Three Musketeers, and Katherine Manners, then the
richest heiress in England. After his father’s assassination, he was
raised alongside the children of Charles I. He was one of the rakes of
Charles II’s court—hot-tempered, unpredictable, and bisexual. Though he
had great influence over the king, his disputes with the monarch landed
him in the Tower on four separate occasions. His love for
Henrietta-Anne Stuart was well-attested, and often drove him to
extremities of behavior.

Charles II: (1630–85) Charles Stuart fled to France in 1646, returned
briefly to Scotland in 1651, where he was crowned, was routed by
Cromwell in September, and returned to France until Mazarin signed a
treaty with Cromwell in 1655 declaring the deposed monarch persona non
grata in France. With Monk’s support, he finally returned to London as
a king in 1661. During his reign there were two wars with the Dutch,
the great plague occurred, the Habeas Corpus Act was passed, and the
Great Fire swept London. The visit to Mazarin depicted at the beginning
of The Vicomte de Bragelonne has its basis in an actual visit paid by
the deposed monarch to the Cardinal in Spain in 1659. It was only one
of many attempts to gain French support.

Chevreuse: (1600–79) Marie-Aime de Rohan Bazon married the Duc de
Chevreuse in 1622. She was a close friend of Anne of Austria, and used
many lovers in her plots against Richelieu. Although regularly exiled
by Louis XIII, she constantly snuck back to court. She was imprisoned
in 1628, escaped in 1637, and fled to Spain, and then England, where
she was again briefly imprisoned on the Isle of Wight. She moved to
Belgium, and was allowed to return to France by Mazarin in 1643. She
was quickly exiled again, but allowed to return under the Amnesty of
Reuil in 1649. She continued her intrigues during the Fronde and was
named as Raoul de Bragelonne’s mother in Twenty Years After.

Colbert: (1619–83) Jean-Baptiste Colbert was born in Reins, the son of
a minor official and an agent of Richelieu’s. He was employed first by
the Secretary of State for War, in 1640, and later became Mazarin’s
intendant in 1655. He purchased a barony in 1658 and entered the
aristocracy. Mazarin’s words on his deathbed, recommending Colbert to
Louis XIV were portrayed by Dumas with accuracy. Mazarin actually said,
“I owe you everything, but I pay my debt to your majesty in giving you
Colbert.” He became Louis’s chief minister in 1661 and immediately
began administering the reforms necessary after Fouquet’s regime. In a
decade, he effectively tripled the revenues. Although he did not
personally care for him, Dumas’s estimation of Colbert’s “glorious
works” and projects was fairly accurate—in addition to his building
projects he also supported many French industries and sent explorers
and colonists to America. Although he built the French navy, he
eventually became opposed to the wars of Louis XIV, as they thwarted
his efforts to keep the budget balanced.

Conde: (1621–86) Louis de Bourbon, Duc d’Enghien, became Prince de
Conde in 1646, on the death of his father. During the 1640s he
distinguished himself in several battles and gained a name for his
military skills. He believed, however, that he had not been rewarded
sufficiently, and alienated both the queen and Mazarin to the extent
that he was jailed for a year in 1650. In retaliation he raised an army
to take the king away from his advisors, failed, and left France in
1653. He continued to fight in every campaign against France until his
rehabilitation in 1659, after which he retired to his estates. He
returned to service in 1668 and died in battle in 1674.

D’Artagnan: Charles de Batz-Castlemore, sieur d’Artagnan, was born in
Tarbes around 1615. He joined Richelieu’s Guards in 1635 and then the
musketeers in 1644. During the years 1646–1657, when the musketeers
were disbanded in actual history, Mazarin used him as a courier. He was
appointed second-in-command to the absentee Captain-Lieutenant of the
musketeers (a nephew of Mazarin’s who had no interest in the work) in
1657, when the company was reformed. Although he only held the rank of
Lieutenant, he was the actual commander of the troops. He married in
1659, had two sons, and separated from his wife in 1665. It was indeed
the real D’Artagnan who, in 1661, arrested Fouquet, though not nearly
as dramatically as Dumas’s depiction, and escorted him first to Angers,
and later, after the former minister’s trial, to Pignerol. He became
Captain-Lieutenant of the musketeers in 1667, in other words, the
commander of the musketeers, as the rank of Captain-General was
reserved for the king himself. During Louis’s invasion of the Dutch
Republic, he was briefly governor of Lille in 1672. He was killed at
the siege of Maastricht in March of 1673. From his few surviving
documents, he appears to have been rather an unimaginative soldier with
a great respect for authority. He never lost his Gascon accent, which
is detectable even in his letters. His spelling was atrocious even by
the standards of the time. Dumas bases his character largely on his own
imagination and from another fictional work from 1700 entitled The
Memoirs of M. d’Artagnan by Courtilz de Sandras, from which he got the
basis for the first few chapters of The Three Musketeers. Dumas never,
however, read beyond the first volume of Sandras’s work, and vastly
altered the material he did read, making it uniquely his own. The
character of Milady also comes from Sandras’s writings, wherein
D’Artagnan encounters a mysterious English noblewoman known only as
Miledi.

Fouquet: (1615–80) Raised to power by Mazarin, Nicholas Fouquet was far
from the brilliant administrator portrayed by Dumas. He built a vast
fortune through blatant abuses of power during his tenure as
superintendent of France’s finances, and generally dispersed that
fortune in the construction of his mansion at Vaux and in his role as a
famous patron of the arts. His generous style of management won him
admiration, but the members of the court generally resented his obvious
corruption. Louis XIV had Fouquet arrested in 1661, more probably from
fear of his influence rather than jealousy, though Fouquet did possibly
take some liberties with the king’s mistress during a royal visit.
Belle-Isle was never given to the king; Louis sent a garrison to occupy
it after Fouquet had been arrested. Fouquet sold his post of
procureur-general to Louis for 1.4 million livres, not Vanel. The real
D’Artagnan, Charles de Batz-Castlemore, arrested him in September and
escorted him to Pignerol after his three-year trial. Dumas largely
altered the character of Fouquet from his historical counterpart,
turning him into a Romantic cavalier who had all the qualities Dumas
himself admired, and making him a foil for the somewhat lackluster
Colbert.

Guiche: (1637–73) Armand de Gramont, Comte de Guiche, was a soldier,
adventurer, and a bisexual. He was part of the entourage of the
homosexual Philippe d’Orleans, where many reckoned him the handsomest
man at court. He was known for being vain, overbearing, and somewhat
contemptuous, but many lovers of both genders often overlooked these
flaws. It is generally accepted that he became the lover of Henrietta
d’Orleans, but for a time he also paid court to Louise de la Valliere.
Guiche was, however, not sufficiently enamored with Louise to challenge
the king’s affections, and, according to Madame de La Fayette (whose
memoirs were one of Dumas’s major sources), he “gave her up and even
quarreled with her, using her very rudely.” He was exiled in 1662 for
attempting to come between Louis and Louise. He then fought against the
Turks in Poland, against the English for the Dutch, and eventually
returned to France in 1669. He returned to court in 1671.

Gourville: (1625–1703) Jean Herault de Gourville participated in the
Fronde before coming to work for Fouquet. After Fouquet’s arrest he was
sentenced to death, but he escaped to Brussels, where he lived by less
than honest means.

Henrietta: (1644–1670) Henrietta-Anne Stuart, daughter of Charles I and
Henrietta-Maria (Henriette in the text), was left behind at Exeter when
her mother fled to France, but her governess smuggled her to France in
1646, where she was raised Catholic. The “privations” which she
supposedly endured in France were greatly exaggerated by Dumas. With a
reputation for cleverness and beauty, she was married to Philippe
d’Orleans in 1661. Shortly afterwards, the obvious attentions of both
Buckingham and De Guiche did indeed arouse her husband’s jealousy,
leading to both Buckingham and De Guiche being persuaded to leave the
court. Their marriage, due to Philippe’s homosexuality and excessive
jealousy, was far short of successful. Before the king took La Valliere
as his mistress, he was quite captivated by Henrietta, and it wasn’t
until the monarch’s attentions shifted to La Valliere that she became
receptive to De Guiche’s advances. In 1670 she was sent to England to
persuade Charles II to sign the Treaty of Dover, which he did, and was
poisoned to death on her return.

Lambert: (1619–83) John Lambert, though trained as a lawyer, turned out
to be one of the greatest soldiers of the English Civil War. He played
a large roll in installing Cromwell as Lord Protector, but later turned
against him. He led disgruntled soldiers against Richard Cromwell, and
in October 1659 he dismissed the “Rump” Parliament, effectively taking
control of the country himself. Monk defeated him in 1661 and he was
sent to the Tower in 1662. He was later banished to Guernsey, where he
lived out his life in confinement.

Laporte: (1603–80) Pierre de la Porte entered the queen’s service in
1621. He helped her carry on correspondence with the Spanish court and
was imprisoned for “treason” in 1637. When Anne of Austria assumed the
Regency in 1643 he was returned to favor. He became Louis XIV’s valet
de chambre in 1645. His memoirs were one of Dumas’s major sources of
historical research.

La Valliere: (1644–1710) Francoise-Louise de la Baume le Blanc, later
the Duchesse de la Valliere, was born near Amboise and became part of
the entourage of the Duchesse d’Orleans at Blois. There it was rumored
that a young man, later identified as Jean de Bragelonne, was in love
with her. The affair did not progress far, but Dumas used it as his
basis for the character of Raoul de Bragelonne. After the death of
Gaston d’Orleans, she moved to Paris, where the Duchesse de Choisy
proposed her as lady of honor to the new Madame (Henrietta). Soon
afterwards the king took an interest in her, and she was his mistress
from 1661–67. They had four children together. She was not considered
terribly beautiful—she was slim, tall, and had blue eyes and bad teeth.
She limped slightly, due to a badly set broken leg, but was reported to
dance well. In 1670, after Madame de Montespan had replaced her, she
retired from court life. She took the veil in 1674. The Oxford World’s
Classics edition of Louise de la Valliere, 1998, has her portrait on
the cover. Many of the episodes between Louise and Louis, though
perhaps chronologically displaced or condensed, were portrayed very
accurately by Dumas, including the flight to the convent, the decision
of the king and Madame to pretend that he was in love with her, and the
king riding beside her carriage during the promenades.

Lorraine: (1643–1702) Philippe de Lorraine was called the Chevalier de
Lorraine because he once intended to join the Order of Malta. He was
the favorite of Philippe d’Orleans for many years, and he received
military and ecclesiastical preference as a result. Like Philippe, he,
too, was homosexual. He was heir to the Duchy of Lorraine, but stripped
of his title in 1662. He protested, and was ordered to leave France. He
assumed the title of Duke in 1675, and was recognized by every other
European nation besides France.

Louis XIV: (1638–1715) Louis de Bourbon, “The Sun King,” assumed the
throne in 1643 after the death of Louis XIII. Anne of Austria ruled
during his infancy, with Gaston d’Orleans as her Lieutenant-Governor
and Mazarin as her first minister. Mazarin managed to not only preserve
the monarchy through the Fronde, but also strengthen it considerably.
Upon Mazarin’s death in March, 1661, Louis determined to rule
personally. With Colbert’s assistance, he removed the corrupt Fouquet
and declared himself the Sun King the following year. His rule of 72
years was the longest of any European monarch. Later in his reign, his
wars threatened to bankrupt the state, as well as his legendary
excesses, such as the great palace at Versailles. He is famous for the
quote, “Je suis l’etat,” meaning, “I am the State.”

Madame: The title customarily given to the wife of the king’s brother.
Until 1660 it was given to Gaston d’Orleans’s wife, Marguerite. After
Gaston’s death, it fell to Henrietta of England, and Marguerite was
referred to as the “Dowager Madame.” See also “Monsieur.”

Malicorne: (1626–94) Germain Texier was the Baron de Malicorne.
Although Dumas portrays him as the son of a syndic, he was in fact a
squire of the Duc de Guise by 1648. He was also the lover of
Mademoiselle de Pons. He married, in 1665, not Montalais, but a
daughter from the first marriage of Saint-Remy, Louise de la Valliere’s
step-father.

Mancini: (1640–1715) Marie de Mancini captured the young Louis XIV’s
heart in 1658, but he was forced to abandon her in favor of a political
marriage to the Spanish Infanta Maria-Theresa. Her sister, Olympe
(1639–1708), later became one of Louis’s mistresses. Dumas misplaces
the chronology slightly; Mazarin’s nieces were removed from court in
1659. The meeting between Louis and Marie portrayed by Dumas was an
amalgamation of two meetings, both of which occurred in 1659.

Manicamp: (1628?–1708) Louis de Madallan de Lesparre was the Seigneur
of Manicamp, and later the Comte de Manicamp. He was a soldier, who
fought with Conde at Lens, and a few other battles. He lost an arm at
Charenton in 1652. Dumas took the name for one of his characters, but
preserved nothing else.

Maria-Theresa: (1638–83) Maria-Theresa of Austria was the daughter of
Philip IV of Spain. She married Louis XIV on June 6, 1660, to promote a
French-Spanish alliance wrought by Mazarin. The king’s constant
infidelities caused her a great deal of anguish, as she was truly in
love with Louis XIV. In real life she was quite pious and preferred to
devote most of her life to good works. Dumas found her quite boring,
and relegates her to a minor character.

Mazarin: (1602–61) Jules Mazarin was a diplomat in the service of the
Pope when he was sent to negotiate with Richelieu in 1630. He became
Richelieu’s protege, and was naturalized French in 1639. In 1641
Richelieu had him named a cardinal as well as his own successor. It is
generally accepted that he became Anne of Austria’s lover, though not,
as Dumas suggests, her secret husband. He was not, actually, an
ordained priest. He raised taxes, aroused the jealousy of the nobles,
and was an Italian—all of which made him extremely unpopular with
nearly every class of the French people. Most considered him to be
extremely self-serving and quite greedy. His private fortune is
estimated at between 13 and 40 million livres. His diplomatic skills,
however, were considerable. Abroad he furthered French interests in
southern Germany by ending the Thirty Years War in 1648 and allied
France with Cromwell in 1654. At home he maneuvered the monarchy
through the Fronde, leaving it stronger as a result. The priest who
attended him on his deathbed insisted that he died in the true faith,
though he was reckoned during his life more of a philosopher than a
Christian.

Michon, Marie: The pseudonym of the Duchesse de Chevreuse in The Three
Musketeers.

Monk: (1608–70) George Monk was a career soldier who served under
Cromwell and, as a reward, was made governor of Scotland in 1654. In
1659, as disorder in England was rising steadily, he decided to step
into the fray, and marched south in January, 1661, with 6,000 men. He
arrived in London five weeks later, unopposed, but without revealing
his motives. His decision to reinstate the Stuarts was probably
influenced by popular opinion, though his true motives still baffle
historians, and he met the returning King Charles II at Dover on May
23, 1661. Charles made him the Duke of Albermarle and gave him the
highest offices in the state. Monk then retired to private life, but
served as a naval commander in later wars with the Dutch.

Monsieur: The court title of the king’s brother. Gaston d’Orleans held
it until his death in 1660. The title fell to Philip d’Anjou, who also
assumed the title of Duc d’Orleans.

Montalais: Nicole-Anne-Constance de Montalais, called Aure by Dumas,
was, like La Valliere, a maid of honor at the court of Gaston
d’Orleans. In 1661 she entered the service of Henrietta d’Orleans, and
shared an apartment with La Valliere. She became La Valliere’s
confidante, and used the information thus garnered to her own ends. She
was known as a notorious schemer, and the historical record does
indicate that she was in love, at least for a time, with a man named
Malicorne.

Montespan: (1641–1707) Francoise-Athenais de Rochechouart de Mortemart
was born at the Chateau de Tonnay-Charente. She was a maid of honor at
the marriage of Philip d’Orleans and Henrietta Stuart in March, 1661.
In 1663 she married the Duc de Montespan et d’Antin, and replaced La
Valliere as the king’s mistress in 1667.

Orleans, Gaston d’: (1608–60) Gaston-Jean-Baptiste de France, Duc
d’Orleans, was the younger brother of Louis XIII. He regularly plotted
against Richelieu, thereby indirectly against his brother, the king. He
became Lieutenant-Governor of the Kingdom when Anne of Austria assumed
the Regency in 1643. He supported Anne during the first Fronde, but
turned against her in the second, for which he was exiled to Blois in
1652. He reconciled with the court in 1659. Aramis judged him as a man
“void of courage and honesty,” a view shared by his contemporaries. The
Cardinal de Retz said of him that he had “everything a gentleman should
have, except courage.” His presence in the novel is entirely fictional;
he died in February, 1660.

Orleans, Philippe d’: (1640–71) Philippe, called Philip by Dumas, was
the second son of Louis XIII and Anne of Austria, and Louis XIV’s
younger brother. He was Duc d’Anjou until 1660 when his uncle, Gaston
d’Orleans died, leaving the title of Duc d’Orleans and the court title
of “Monsieur” to him. He married Henrietta Stuart of England in 1661,
but his homosexuality and jealousy ensured that the marriage was less
than ideal, to say the least.

Pellisson: (1640–1701) Paul Pellisson (called Pelisson by Dumas) was
part of Fouquet’s literary circle and a member of the French Academy.
Disfigured by smallpox in his youth, his ugliness brought him a sort of
fame. After Fouquet’s arrest, Pellisson wrote quite spiritedly in the
defense of the former Superintendent of Finances. He was rewarded for
his loyalty with five years in the Bastile. He subsequently regained
the royal favor, and became the Historiographer Royal.

Richelieu: (1585–1642) Although he does not appear in The Vicomte de
Bragelonne, Armand-Jean du Plessis, Duc de Richelieu, is mentioned
several times. He was an admirer of Machiavelli and, under the reign of
Louis XIII, he became the most powerful man in France. He greatly
strengthened France both at home and abroad, and named Mazarin as his
successor shortly before his death. In The Three Musketeers, it is he
who lays the snare for Anne of Austria involving the famous diamond
studs given to the Duke of Buckingham. D’Artagnan and his three friends
rescue the queen from this embarrassing predicament.

Saint-Aignan: (1610–87) Francois de Beauvillier, the Comte de
Saint-Aignan, was a former governor of the Touraine. He finally
realized his ambition, mentioned by Dumas, of joining the French
Academy in 1663. Before becoming First Gentleman to the King’s
Bedchamber, he was part of Gaston d’Orleans’s military household.
Though quite a few years Louis XIV’s senior, he became the young king’s
chief purveyor of pleasures.

Saint-Remy: Francoise le Prevot de la Coutelaye became Madame de
Saint-Remy following her third marriage. Her first was to a man named
Besnard, a councilor of the Parliament at Rennes. Her second marriage
was to Laurent de la Baume le Blanc, lord of the manor of La Valliere.
He was Louise de la Valliere’s father. Laurent died in 1651, and in
1655 she married Jacques Couravel, Marquis de Saint-Remy, First
Chamberlain to Gaston d’Orleans. After Gaston’s death, they both moved
to Paris.

Tréville: (1598–1672) Arnaud-Jean du Peyrer, Comte de Troisvilles
(written and pronounced Tréville) does not appear in The Vicomte de
Bragelonne, but he was D’Artagnan’s (both the real and fictional)
predecessor as Captain of the Musketeers. He was a career soldier and,
like D’Artagnan, a Gascon. He was appointed Captain-Lieutenant of the
Musketeers in 1634 (the rank of Captain-General was reserved for the
king), and was exiled in 1642 for opposing Richelieu. Mazarin disbanded
the musketeers in 1646 (an historical fact ignored by Dumas), and
Tréville retired to Foix as its governor. In The Three Musketeers
(which adds about 10 years to the ages of the historical counterparts),
it was in Tréville’s office that the first meeting between D’Artagnan,
Athos, Porthos, and Aramis occurred.

Vanel: (1644–1703) Anne-Marguerite Vanel was the daughter of Claude
Vanel (a magistrate in the Paris Parliament) and became the wife of
Jean Coiffer (a member of the Royal Audit Office) in 1654.
Contemporaries described her as a “dainty and extremely pretty young
woman with a lively and very witty turn of mind.” She was Fouquet’s
mistress during the 1650s, and later transferred her affections to
Colbert. Her high spirits annoyed Colbert, and he passed her off to his
brother.

Wardes: (1620–88) Francois-Rene Crespin du Bec was the Marquis de
Vardes, and a noted schemer and bold liar. Some women, though,
including Madame de Motteville, found him charming. Dumas creates two
characters out of the historical De Vardes. The father plays a
prominent part in The Three Musketeers and Twenty Years After, and the
son in The Vicomte de Bragelonne, though they were, in reality, the
same man. He was named Governor of Aigues-Mortes in 1660 and was
banished there a few years later following a court scandal. Although a
favorite of Louis XIV, he got entangled in a plot by Olympe Mancini
(then the Comtesse de Soissons) to avenge her sister, Marie, whom the
king had abandoned in favor of his political marriage to Maria-Theresa
of Spain. He remained in Aigues- Mortes for 17 years.

Much of the information for these biographies was taken from the David
Coward’s editions of the D’Artagnan Romances, published by Oxford
World’s Classics. Additional material came from the Fireblade
Coffeehouse’s web page on Alexandre Dumas at
www.hoboes.com/html/FireBlade/Dumas/. The quote from Robert Louis
Stevenson comes from his A Gossip on a Novel of Dumas’s from Memories
and Portraits.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VICOMTE DE BRAGELONNE: THE END AND BEGINNING OF AN ERA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


