The Project Gutenberg eBook of German Moonlight
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

*** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook. Details Below. ***
***     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.      ***


Title: German Moonlight

Author: Wilhelm Raabe

Translator: Michael Wooff

Release date: April 16, 2010 [eBook #32009]
                Most recently updated: May 9, 2010

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Michael Wooff, with German from the original text, and his own translation


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GERMAN MOONLIGHT ***




Produced by Michael Wooff, with German from the original
text, and his own translation.








German Moonlight

A Story by Wilhelm Raabe (1831-1910)

Let me state my case calmly and without any undue fuss.  I am, even
by German standards, an uncommonly prudent person and I know how to
keep my five senses under control. Apart from that, I am a lawyer
and father to three sons. Neither during lilac time nor when there
are hibiscus, sunflowers and asters on the ground am I in the habit
of laying myself open to sentimental and romantic mood-swings. I do
not keep a diary, but my legal appointments books are stored in
strict chronological order, year by year, on my library shelves.
First of all I have to tell you that, in the year 1867, acting on
medical advice, because of the sea air and the salt water, I found
myself on the island of Sylt and that, while I was there, I made the
acquaintance of someone--a quite extraordinary acquaintance.

It goes without saying that I cannot stop myself by means of an
account in writing of my own experiences and feelings from
correcting or corroborating things often felt and even more
frequently depicted and described in letters or printed matter. The
impression made by the lapping of waves, sand dunes and dune grass,
the flight of seagulls and, above all, the west wind on everyone who
has had to wash off the dust and sweat of German officialdom is a
pleasant and invigorating one. These things did not fail to have the
same effect on me either given that the efforts that preceded the
said invigoration were no less strenuous.

I lived on the periphery of two villages, Tinnum and Westerland, and
therefore had a walk of at least half an hour to cover in order to
reach the beach and the health-giving briny. A not much shorter walk
led from there to the good fellow who took us every day at noon for
a consideration back again. As a German civil servant used to
moderation I set no great store by domestic bliss or even luxury. As
I had taken with me seven of my twenty-one pipes, I could have set
up home for myself in a megalithic tomb and not have felt
uncomfortable.

Good.  I lived with a baker who heated his oven with jetsam wood,
that is to say wood bought at beach auctions that came from the
spars and timberwork of ships that had foundered on the sand. I
helped him from time to time to split this wood and felt pleasantly
stimulated here by the task--at home I devote myself to this chore
more for health reasons.

At home I saw and split my firewood in my leisure time, whereas here
I did things for fun or carefully perused some papers on the House
of Brunswick inheritance that I had brought with me in my suitcase.
During what would have been my business hours I went for walks along
the beach.

When you stay in a place like this to take the waters everything
takes that much longer. At home I walk every day and in every
weather round the purpose-built walls of the town where I carry out
my duties as a public servant. On Sylt I had lunch, lay down on a
dune for an hour for an afternoon nap and then ran along the beach
towards the north of the island, sometimes getting as far as the Red
Cliff, but usually only as far as the bathing huts of Wenningstedt.

As the sea like a washerwoman of both sexes cannot keep things to
him or herself, but throws everything back, these runs were never
without a certain charm. Even though I am by nature a prosaic
person, I can nevertheless feel sadness when I turn a dead seal
lying on its back over onto its belly and have thoughts about my own
mortality as I do so.

Good--or rather on this occasion: even better!  I had been on this
long, stretched out from south to north and vice versa, island for
three weeks approximately when I had the encounter already mentioned
at the start of my narrative.

It was getting on towards evening.  The sun had gone down and today
I was coming back from the Red Cliff, and no less tired for all that
since low tide had made the way to the beach accessible for all
those patients on Sylt suffering from abdominal problems to the best
of its ability. After walking ten steps over quite tight-packed
sand, people sank that much deeper into the sand over the next two
hundred steps, and the wife, daughter, cousin or sweetheart of my
readers who would have graciously picked their way over this path so
uncommonly beneficial to health, I should not have hesitated in fact
to commend to the attention of a lyric or epic poet if I could have
numbered such a one then, with the later exception of Circuit Judge
Löhnefinke, among my colleagues and other friends and enemies.

I said that the sun had gone down and I can put it even more
succinctly. It was going down just as I reached the dunes south of
Wenningstedt, opposite the great chasm. A fishing boat from Hamburg
or Cuxhaven followed the sun in disappearing into the sea mist on
the horizon and the pleasing and easy on the eye green colour of the
water turned to gloomy grey. Even the orange colouring of the
sandhill on the left of the sound but tiring path disappeared, and
the colour grey got the upper hand to both left and right. The dune
grass started to lisp as the wind got cooler--twilight had fallen
and there were cogent reasons for supposing that it would soon be
night.

Stumbling and, despite the evening cool, bathed in sweat, I was
quickening my gait in the direction of my evening pipe when the
unexpected happened and I got to know my colleague Löhnefinke.

Everyone who knows the beach on the west coast of Sylt also knows
how steeply the dunes opposite the sandy sanatorium path fall down
to the sea, and at one of the places where they were at their
steepest my colleague fell out of the sky on top of my head and my
journey through life was never the same again so may the estimable
reader allow me to continue with my statement of events with my
accustomed calm and without exciting myself.

I found myself, as previously stated, opposite the great chasm and
the sun had said goodbye five minutes beforehand when, suddenly, at
the top of the dune on the left, at approximately seventy feet above
my head, a man appeared, running towards the edge of the precipice
in a tearing hurry, threw his arms up to heaven, then crouched down
and in one fell swoop, to my horror, all the way down the steep,
almost vertical sandhill slipped--slid--shot!

Before the cry of total amazement, half of shock, that I then came
out with had died away, the man was already sitting at the bottom of
the dune in soft sand between a half stove-in barrel that had been
washed ashore there and a broken ship's lantern and looking at me,
the scurrying passer-by, with his mouth wide open, pale-faced with
shock and yet managing to twist his lips into a broad grin. He
called out, shouted or perhaps it was more of a howl:

"It's--it's--behind me!  I'm very sorry, sir, I'm sure--but it puts
me on edge..."

"Who?  What?  Who is behind you?"  I shouted, staring up at the grey
mass of the sandhill without spying anything in the least bit
threatening. Nothing showed itself to me that could justify the
boundless consternation and the daring flight of the individual
still sitting up in the sand in front of me, a rather portly
individual extremely well-dressed.

"Who is behind you?  No-one as far as I can see!  So tell me!  Who's
after you? What prompted you to jump like that? I really can't see
anything at all up there!"

"There is!  There is!  There's the moon--Luna--Selene!  No, not Luna
and Selene, but that moon, that damnable German moon! It's going up
behind the mud flats as we speak and will, in a few minutes time, be
up there over the dune behind me! And there's no cover here, no
shelter--not even an umbrella--and quarter of an hour to wait for
the next omnibus before we can seek refuge. It'll be the death of
me!"

I usually carry an umbrella with me and this day was no exception.
But the stranger in his distraught state had not noticed it and
before I offered it to the aforementioned fool, I naturally gave the
matter some consideration.

It was clear to me, juridically clear, that I was in the presence of
a madman and, quickly composing myself, I thought over how, under
such circumstances, I ought to behave towards him. Should I abandon
the man to his fate, unable as I was to change one iota of his
idiosyncratic imaginings, and leave it up to his keepers to capture
him, or should I strike up a conversation with him and, at the risk
of ending up having unpleasant differences of opinion in the
process, try to get a better understanding of his situation?

As a human being I should have preferred the former; as a lawyer and
a criminologist I opted for the latter. I yielded to temptation and
carried on talking to him.

"My dear fellow," I said, "if you believe that being under an
umbrella will protect you against your enemy, please make use of
mine. Take my arm."

I had already opened up the silk umbrella and the lunatic had jumped
up in the air with a joyful shout.

"Heaven, sir, has led me here to you!"

He took hold of my arm and, tipping his hat to me, said:

"Allow me to introduce myself.  My name is Löhnefinke, Circuit Judge
to the Royal Court of Prussia at Gross-Fauhlenberg in the province
of..."

I sprang away from him dumbfounded:

"That isn't possible!"

"Sir?"

"You?  You, who to escape the moon rising just dashed headfirst down
that sand dune at the risk of breaking your neck, you are Circuit
Judge Löhnefinke? It isn't possible!"

"But I am he!  If you can call it a pleasure, I do have the pleasure
of being the person so named."

I mastered myself with difficulty inasmuch as I now had this to say
to myself, namely that it was beyond all doubt now that I was in the
presence of a madman with more than one fixed idea. The unfortunate
wretch does not just see the moon as his enemy, but sees himself as
someone else.

"Yes, my name is Löhnefinke and I would consider it an honour if you
would now acquaint me with yours."

What could I do?  I introduced myself and gave my name and title.
The lunatic immediately tipped his hat to me again, grasped my hand,
shook it warmly and said:

"Oh, my dear colleague, see how fate brings people together!
Quarter of an hour ago I wouldn't even have dreamt of it, truly. So
we've known each other now for a good length of time. Cast your mind
back! Did we not in the case of Johann Peter Müller, the self-styled
leader of the gypsies from Langensalza, exchange rulings and engage
in professional correspondence? You do remember that case, don't
you? Oh, how pleased it makes me!"

Was it a dream or was it reality?  Was this man crazy or was it me?

This was indeed how things stood and I could remember quite clearly
there and then all my correspondence with the Royal Prussian Court
of Justice in Gross-Fauhlenberg. And my singular companion (already
we were walking next to each other) did not stop at simply stating
these facts, no. He immediately immersed himself in all the finer
details of the case in point, setting out verbally all the
considerations that he had previously put in writing and I answered
him as if there were really no more doubt as far as I was concerned
that he really was the Royal Prussian court official he claimed to
be and really was called Löhnefinke. The full moon had in the
meantime climbed up in the sky to the east of us and was shining
directly down on our heads without my companion being in the least
concerned about it. Strolling towards the bathing beach of
Westerland arm in arm we became more and more absorbed in talking
shop and let the moon shine down as much as it liked. We had almost
reached the men's bathing huts and were nearing the steps that lead
up from the beach to the top of the dunes when my colleague, who,
despite his earlier exaltation had just shown himself to be an
extremely clear and perceptive legal mind, all of a sudden, getting
stuck in the sand, looked round, looked up and, becoming as pale as
a ghost, groaned:

"Ye gods, we're back in the middle of it again!"

No doubt about it--we were back in the middle of it again.  The
fixed idea grabbed hold of the poor man afresh as he hysterically
and anxiously pulled my outstretched umbrella down so that it rested
on his hat and I could do nothing more for Circuit Judge Löhnefinke
than to tighten my grip on his elbow and to speak to the squirming
and struggling man in an admonitory tone of voice:

"But my dear sir, please!  Compose yourself!  Compose yourself!
This crackpot behaviour of yours is too much. How has this harmless
source of light actually wronged you? Or what have you done to wrong
it? Show some sense and convince yourself of this: this innocent
satellite shows no sign whatsoever of falling on our heads."

"My head hurts!  My head hurts!" groaned the judge, holding the part
of the body in question with both hands.

"Come on now.  Nobody's chasing you.  Nobody's after you.  Your
reaction is quite unnecessary. Don't take what I say amiss."

"Nobody?  Nobody?" groaned Löhnefinke.

"Nobody!  I'll tell you what--let's go up there.  We'll find people
in that restaurant, conviviality, some beverage or other to cheer us
up and definitely a paraffin lamp which will put your enemy, male or
female, in the shade."

"Paraffin!" Löhnefinke muttered to himself, catching hold of and
holding onto the word like a guilty man in the high court a cry of
'Amnesty'?

"Listen.  There's still a brass band playing up there.  How about we
sit down for a while to imbibe a glass of grog and..."

"...wait for the moon to go down?  Yes.  That would be the right
thing to do."

"But we'll have a long wait, I'm afraid.  The moon doesn't set until
past quarter to seven tomorrow morning, but, if it's any
consolation, dark clouds are rising from the sea and we can wait
until one of those clouds comes to cover the moon as it surely
will."

"Yes.  I take your point.  I'll willingly, only too willingly, go
along with your suggestion. Colleague, I'm entirely under your
guardianship. We'll go to this watering hole, wait till a cloud
masks that grinning monstrosity and drink the odd grog while we do
so!" opined the worked-up Prussian civil servant. And so we ascended
the steep steps, arrived, without having broken our necks, at the
top of them and turned right through the dune grass towards the
illuminated pavilion on the links, loud with blaring music and
packed out with spa outpatients.

Just as we went through the door of the round building, however, the
brass band suddenly stopped playing. The musicians put away their
instruments or tucked them under their arms. They also downed a free
schnapps at the buffet counter and left, and most of their audience,
strangely enough, followed on their heels without first having
digested the pleasure derived from their music. Only a few groups of
more discerning people continued to linger over their glasses.

A rather lively wind sprang up over the North Sea.  The waves
crashed with greater noise and were covered with whiter and more
foamy caps. The enlivening and warming drink that we had ordered
before we sat down was about to have the most soothing of influences
on both our state of mind and our bodily comfort.

Now we were seated and while, at the next table, an animated group
chatted merrily, I looked at my new acquaintance and certainly not
with stealthy sideways glances, but point blank through the paraffin
lamp's glow, and my astonishment grew with my scrutiny.

Circuit Judge Löhnefinke from Gross-Fauhlenberg was a man of
approximately fifty years of age, corpulent, as we have already
commented, and otherwise without any external distinguishing marks.
He had a broad chin and his hair was short and sprinkled with grey.
He had the beard of a Prussian official and two clever, grey eyes
which took in every object they tacked on to. None of this gave me
any reason to suppose that the man was a candidate for a loony bin
and yet--I couldn't help it! Laying my hand on his arm and pulling
myself up close to him, I said:

"Don't take this the wrong way, Löhnefinke, but right now I don't
believe it happened any more."

"What didn't happen?"

"Your appearance just now.  Your breakneck fall down the dune, that
daredevil slide near Wenningstedt or, to put it in a nutshell, your
vision of the moon as your enemy."

Immediately there came an extraordinary change over the whole of
this man sitting right next to me. He once more took evasive action
and as he had formerly grasped my umbrella, now he grasped the glass
in front of him, knocked back the hot, steaming mixture therein in
one long swig and hissed through his teeth:

"It's quite true nevertheless.  I hate the moon.  It's my deadliest
enemy and I am eclipsed by it as it is eclipsed itself by that
paraffin lamp swinging above us."

I waved to the waitress, who understood my wave and put another
steaming glass down right under my colleague's nose.

"Thank you," said the judge.  "And I have you to thank as well for,
had I not fallen into the arms of yourself and your umbrella, I
really don't know what would have become of me on that shadowless
beach."

"Colleague," I said, "I am a law-abiding man and have attended to my
official duties for many years now to the satisfaction of my
official subordinates and the powers that be. I keep my medal for
services rendered at home in a filing cabinet and have never
knowingly divulged any secret confided in me, scout's honour. Would
you take it amiss, colleague, if I asked you to tell me how you came
to quarrel with that innocent satellite revolving round our sinful
earth?"

"I would certainly not take it amiss," said the colleague.  "On the
contrary, from time to time I feel the most pressing need to give
vent to my hate and anger and my innermost anxieties and
inhibitions. Order another glass of grog and listen to the story
that I have to tell. Afterwards you can judge and I will abide by
your judgement, all the more so as I already know you to be a most
capable lawyer from our official correspondence."

"I am most greatly indebted to you," I said, hanging now on his
every word, and looked into his eyes as I had not looked into the
eyes of my bride when we got married twenty-five years ago. He drank
another deep draught of the steaming beverage, smacked his lips and
commenced his confession.

"First of all," he said, "I must tell you that my doctor has sent me
to this seaside health resort at the instigation of my wife because
of my 'condition' as she calls it, or because of my bad nerves as
he, the doctor, says. For years now this man, who has known me from
my youth, who grew up with me, has laughed at this penchant of mine;
only at my wife's insistence did he come to take the matter
seriously. For once he came to the conclusion that it was high time
to do something to counter this regrettable complex and here I am,
taking to the water daily on doctor's orders and, as you have
learned tonight, so far without the least success. But I digress! In
a word, I'm paying for the sins of my youth."

"Aha!" I murmured, but immediately recognizing my meaning, my
colleague shook his head emphatically and sighed:

"No!  No!  Nothing like that.  If only it had been that!  For my
sins it was quite the opposite of what you have in mind that led to
my breakdown. I can assure you that neither women nor wine led me
astray in my younger days. I was far too staid for that and regret
it today in worry, pain and an island swimming costume. If only I'd
gone off the rails in the days of my youth. If only I had curbed my
fantasy and the danger of being thrown by it and breaking my neck at
the right time! It's a repressed desire for poetry that's sent me
off my rocker long after my fortieth year. The light of the good old
German moon is taking its revenge on me and I doubt that any kind of
bath or water, alkaline or acidic, will help me."

"German moonlight?"

"Yes!  Yes!  The moon drives me mad with its smirking even though I
am Prussian Circuit Judge by Royal Appointment Friedrich Wilhelm
Löhnefinke in Gross-Fauhlenberg, and not just for my own sins do I
atone, but I have the accumulated debts of untold generations of my
forebears to pay back as well to the shining monstrosity. Colleague,
I feel at times most unhappy!"

"Colleague, you interest me most mightily as a person for all that.
I'm eagerly waiting for you to shed further light on this."

"Which I will.  My father was an official by royal appointment and
so was my grandfather, and it would be ridiculous for me to doubt
that my great-grandfather too fell into the same category, a
provincial official, it goes without saying. My mother was a German
matriarch as was my grandmother and my great-grandmother too, of
course. They too were the issue of families of provincial officials.
They knew nothing of poetry and only paid attention to the moon
insofar as it was obliging enough to tell them when it was time to
get their hair cut or to have themselves bled. They left it up to me
to make amends for their collective neglect! My mother read Clauren,
my grandmother the Bible and the hymn book and my great-grandmother
was probably illiterate. My forebears read and wrote their statutes,
read the Legal Times and maybe a newspaper and I was, until quite
recently, their worthy descendant. Then came the year 1848 and the
moon rose for me."

"Aha!" I re-uttered, but my legal colleague shook his head and said:

"No!  No!  No!  That's not it at all!  You're just as mistaken as
you were before. Do you know what we understand by the words 'old
liberal'?"

I nodded with all the energy of a nodding porcelain toy.

"You will therefore admit then that, as an old liberal, one is still
quite far removed from hating the moon and running away from it?"

It would have been silly of me not to have made this admission and,
in making it, I asked a counter question:

"How old were you in March of 1848?"

"I had just reached the age of the Prussian equivalent of a
solicitor's clerk."

"Well done.  Carry on."

"In March it came over the rooves and appeared in my room in Berlin
and I rubbed my eyes unable to believe what I saw. I still did not
have the faintest idea of how dangerous the scamp was, but the year
after, 1849, I got more than an inkling of it. Returning home
hot-headed from a heated public rally, I slept lying down on the
windowsill, and the malicious heavenly body shone down on me for
several hours."

"And?"

"And the following day I had not only a headache, but also a
definite antipathy for many things and people I had formerly held
high in my feeling, thought and estimation. Poetry had broken in and
colleague, do you know what it means when poetry breaks into the
life of a solicitor's clerk in the Royal Prussian Legal Service?"

"No, thank God.  Bear in mind that we have written to each other
only across regional borders."

"True enough, but I didn't know either and only today can I speak of
it. You've spent the whole night dreaming of Lex Romana and the
statute book and then you wake up and try to recall what you've
dreamed about. You succeed only too well and then the misery starts.
You look from your pillow over to your bookcase and suddenly a
desire takes hold of you that you can scarcely master to jump out of
bed, take the whole box of tricks in your arms--and--and--and--do
unspeakable things to it. But you control yourself because it occurs
to you how much money you've invested in this jumble, and you
control yourself too fortunately for the furtherance of your career
and get on with preparing your morning coffee. While you are doing
this the idea comes to you with shattering power that you are at the
disposal of the state without receiving an appropriate reward for it
and not only does your gall bladder play up because of it, but your
coffee too boils over and you eat away at your internal organ and
pour the other, not down the drain, but down your throat. You have
lost some of your illusions and you create new ones. There you have
one of the first effects of our enemy, the moon! Yes, you have
strange illusions and the strangest is that you don't blame yourself
for them. Afterwards you go to the office, meet your subordinate on
the way, greet him politely and now--for the first time--another
dream comes to you! You remember the one that you dreamt when you
lay down with your head next to the open window and the moon shone
on it. You get up and look for the head of chambers, and now, and
wholly and solely because of the German moon, it occurs to you that
you yourself have read more than your ancestors: not just the paper,
but papers, and, apart from that, Schiller and Goethe, Voltaire and
Rousseau, Börne and Stahl, Ranke and Raumer and an incommensurable
mixture of the latest liberal poets. You remember a lot of the
drinking songs you sang at university and the meek and mild moon
which just now appears perhaps as a tender sickle above you in the
light blue of the morning sky, twists your mouth into a scornful
expression and goes on waxing until it is full again while you, day
after day, week after week, go about your business. You start to
feel immensely uncomfortable. You come over to yourself as
unspeakably stupid, silly and tasteless and sniff out stupid things
to say, to which purpose your nose is entirely suited. You go home
and look at your hair starting to grow long in the mirror and if you
should discover thereby a white hair in your beard, your good friend
the moon finds this most opportune, for it is in a position to bind
you more tightly and to pursue its ends more easily for that than
for anything else. The next time you find yourself once more alone
in the night sitting on the windowsill, it makes you think about
that hair. You long for a bosom, a sweet, soft, tender bosom into
which you can pour all your sadness, to which you can speak your
sorrow and with which you can share your frustrations and annoyance.
You dream while still awake and the moon laughs at you even more
than before..."

"Wait a minute, Löhnefinke!" I cried, pressing both hands to my
brow. "Must it always be another person to clarify and be objective
about one's own past, present and future circumstances? Colleague,
you're absolutely right. Even though you are highly strung, I can
still follow your argument! Carry on with what you were
saying--truly the moon is a monster!"

"It certainly is and this German moon is especially!  It comes up
over your roof and you lay your head on your shoulder and stand
there blinking at it full in the face and feeling silly and
embarrassed. And all of a sudden a field of harvest-ripe wheat sways
into your field of vision, a nightingale or some other such songbird
chirps in bushes, a pond lights up, a brook babbles and you,
colleague, commence to babble too. What do you babble? Some
nice-sounding Christian name given at baptism of course ending with
an E or an A--Clothilde, Josephine, Maria, Amalia--who knows!? It's
all one anyway. The decision has been made for you. It's got you.
It's got you with everything you have, that crafty old malicious
moon, that German moon! You even feel inclined to call it your
friend, to stretch out your arms to it, to shed a tear for it and
you are, beyond any further doubt, hopelessly disappointed."

"Yes, I see!" I said, and nothing more.  But my colleague went into
a silent brown study for a time, until he pulled himself together
and went on:

"I was an elected representative of the regional parliament when,
during the national argument over how the army should be organised
from 1862 to 1866, His Majesty sent his gift of the famous symbolic
stick to our prime minister. I voted of course with the majority and
now, now in this year of Our Lord 1867, I have written a sonnet--a
sonnet, just imagine!--a sonnet in praise of our venerable prime
minister and had it published in the advertisement pages of our
national daily. Can you understand me and my relationship to that
moon of ours?"

"Absolutely!" I said after a pregnant pause.

"Then I can be brief in what I have to say and that's what I'll do.
We all know--and so does the moon--a fairly euphonious name that
ends in E or A and the bearer of that name or, if not, we
immediately search for such a name and its bearer, and that the moon
is ready and willing to help us find it and her goes without saying.
No go-between in cases of this sort would lend a hand sooner or more
deftly. It lights our way to the lyrical poet for whom we suddenly
feel more than just an affinity. It manifests itself on the sheet of
paper we ourselves make use of to pay court to the muse. It grins at
us when we wait for a certain woman on the way out of a ballroom,
concert hall or theatre. Later it escorts us home if our mother has
no objection to us bringing her home with us. Who understands better
than it does how to light the way home for a donkey or a person?
It's neither here nor there, but a question well worth asking
nevertheless, whether the blame can also be laid at its door when
our father one fine day gives his permission. Are you married too,
my dear colleague?"

The question bored into my brain so abruptly that I nearly fell off
my chair and I had to collect my thoughts for a minute before I
could answer yes.

"Good!  Then we have talked of this theme at its true worth and no
further talk is called for. Is it responsible for that alliteration
as well? Look, there it is, looking in at the window--the clouds
that you put me off with earlier have also been incapable of hiding
it. The meadows are lit up for miles--such beauty! How wonderful! My
dear colleague, how truly charming the world is, how splendid both
in war and peacetime! Poetry drips down from above and springs up
from below! Listen--listen to the music of the everlasting sea! The
waves dance their immortal dance in the German moonlight--why should
we not dance too? My soul is a drop in the harmonious flow of the
world, a shining, light-filled drop. Colleague, let us partake of
the sweetness of nature. It's a sin to sit here in this dull room
while the elements of earth and water outside are looking so
extraordinarily fine in the German moonlight. Come on. Drink up.
Let's go..."

"You're no longer afraid...?"

"Why should I be afraid?  My dear, dear friend, that's the point!
It beats us all and by its light we win all our victories."

"Even the battle of Königgrätz?"

"Even that one, whatever objections one may have to it.  And all
future great and remarkable battlefield victories as well! Ah, this
air, this light! Let's climb to the top of that dune once again to
take one more look at the holy briny."

"And afterwards, standing in the moonlight, will you tell me some
more of your life story?"

"Willingly, with pleasure, immediately, although, in my opinion, it
really isn't necessary any more. You see, dear friend, the fact
stands as frightening as it is comfortable to live with that the
moon from time to time overwhelms the Royal Prussian legal civil
servant Löhnefinke and the latter, ultimately, has not the least
objection to raise against the intoxication and dizziness it
inspires. Yes, I too found a German girl, wandering in the German
moonlight as I did, got engaged to her with the consent of her
parents and later married her. And now today I find myself in
undisputed possession of an eighteen year old daughter to boot and
perhaps afterwards I can introduce both of those ladies to you."

"So you're not running around by yourself here?  You haven't been
left to your own devices on Sylt?"

"Not at all.  I live with my wife and daughter in Westerland and
have come here to the spa under their supervision. What do you think
of my invitation?"

"Forgive me for asking a silly question, colleague.  This is such a
wonderful evening, such a pleasing encounter and such an extremely
interesting conversation that anything is forgivable."

"Calm down.  We understand each other perfectly. Unbeknown to you I
have had an eye on you all day. You appealed to me as a person and
the lawyer in me immediately recognized you as a kindred spirit and
fate allowed me to bump into you literally not without a purpose and
with total justification. We had to speak out to each other
tonight--it's part of the cure and is in large part due to the salt
water. But the moon--I always have to draw your attention back to
that splendid moon. Yes, I am bound to it and will need to remain in
its bonds until death us do part..."

"Colleague, because of it and with the help of the present moment
and the current state of world affairs, I have become the poet in my
family. Hold on to that idea and you grasp me in my entirety, both
in my mood when we met on the beach and in my present frame of
mind."

Löhnefinke the poet in his family!  I took several steps backwards.
Even though this crazy man stood before me in the moonlight as clear
as the island of Sylt itself, the notion struck me forcibly. It was
like the crack from a cannon that you observed through an eye-glass
as the artillery man blew on the fuse, which is also as if you had
received an actual blow.

"I, heir to such an endless stream of prose," my colleague
continued, "am defeated by my foe and by him led astray each time he
peeps over the horizon despite all my efforts to resist him. I am an
idealist in politics and a poet in the conduct of my household
affairs. I can see the time coming when I'll be keeping my books of
account in hexameters and ottave rime. I'm a stickler for sentiment
and cosiness in the course of an hour, and--colleague! colleague!--
my women, my ladies don't understand me, don't latch on to me.
That's the reason that my nerves are so shattered and the reason why
at their instigation (the instigation of my wife and daughter, I
mean) I have been brought here to Westerland, and now please do me
the honour of coming home with me. It's gradually starting to get
very cool."

He had linked me--with delicacy--and we walked arm in arm over the
moonlit heathland of Sylt. Never in my life had I with such a poetic
Prussian circuit judge strode out hip to hip. He, my exalted
colleague, declaimed poetry in an ever louder voice. He showed a
truly staggering well-readness in both German and foreign lyricism.
Poems addressed to the moon gave way to hymns to freedom and songs
of battle against all kinds of enemies both thinkable and
unthinkable. Tropical landscapes and mood pictures gave way to
stanzas taken from familiar and unfamiliar ballads and romances of
every historical and non-historical type of content. Löhnefinke was
sublime and his enemy, the moon, could really take pleasure in him.
But, being in this state, he would have aroused in more than one of
his and my superiors not only moral but also physical disgust. In
the distance to the north the revolving light of the lighthouse at
Kampen blinked like the eye of a mocker, who draws the attention of
those around him to something hilarious. The sheep out on the heath,
over whose leashes or retaining ropes we stumbled, stood up and
looked after us astonished and amazed.

In this way we got nearer and nearer to the village of Westerland,
but before we reached it we were called to and, to all appearances
visible and audible, were torn in the nicest possible way out of our
dreamy moonlight wandering by night back to reality. Fortunately
neither of us fell off the roof.

As if made out of moonbeams there stood before us on a knoll of the
heath an uncommonly dainty and graceful female form and a quite
charming female face bowed to us in the moonlight and looked
phenomenally pretty. Whether Circuit Judge Löhnefinke from
Gross-Fauhlenberg had a charming face I cannot say, but he possessed
a modest, in a way quite jovial face and his enthusiasm of the last
few hours had embellished it. So I was all the more surprised by the
expression with which he looked at his lovely daughter. Instead of
becoming happier and even more cheerful, his features suddenly went
slack and immediately transformed themselves into a cross between
sullen and peevish.

"Is that finally you, papa?  Well, you're late I must say!" the
elfish phantom cried while coming towards us.

"Yes, it's finally me," grunted my colleague, "and here..."

He did not complete his sentence for the young lady interrupted him:

"We've been waiting for you a long time, papa, and mother is very
angry with you!"

"Hm!" grunted my colleague and "hm!" was also what I said in the
depths of my soul.

"Come, Helene, let's go home," said Löhnefinke soothingly, but the
moonlit elf retorted even more brusquely:

"Thank you, papa, but I'll go with mother.  She's coming now and
will tell you herself how she's waited for you. Mother, here's
father finally!"

He was indeed here, the paterfamilias Löhnefinke, and at this moment
in time he quoted no more German verse and no more foreign either.
Mother stepped forward through the moonlight, quite quickly and
energetically in fact. I would not have been averse to taking my
leave before she reached us, but my colleague held my arm fast with
the grip of a Prussian dragoon and whispered:

"I want to introduce you.  Where are you going?  Colleague, allow me
to present to you my wife!"

What could I express other than the greatest desire to make the
acquaintance of his wife?

Walking between the first houses of the hamlet of Westerland this
worthy lady had already caught up with us and taken the arm of her
daughter. She overlooked me completely to begin with of course to
dedicate herself wholeheartedly to family matters.

"So you've finally turned up, Löhnefinke?!  Your usual lack of
consideration for others as is your wont! Let me tell you,
Löhnefinke..."

"My dear Johanna, look who's here! My friend and correspondent..."

It doesn't happen very often that one is shoved as a folding screen
between a cold draught and the armchair of a rheumatic! The
introductions took place and I adapted myself with my inherent good
nature to the role meted out to me. After a few polite exchanges the
four of us pushed on together to the collection of modest, low,
peaceful, Frisian huts and if there was still one last dark spot for
me in the soul of my colleague, it vanished completely on this short
trek.

How the moon, that German moon, looked down and laughed at the two
women and the Royal Prussian Circuit Judge! It knows how to take its
revenge alright. It has its means, it knows the means at its
disposal and it knows how to use them. My friend Löhnefinke is quite
right--it's a terrible thing to have to inherit the legacy of
generations, of centuries past without being permitted beforehand to
make use of the privilege in law to limit the amounts owing to one's
creditors. It's a crying shame first of all not to pay attention to
that pallid, waxing and waning companion, then to despise it and
finally to be given over to its influence without any great
resistance on your part and to surrender oneself!

One needs to be a man--a German man and a civil servant--to be able
to experience the full horror of something like this. Mrs Johanna
and Miss Helene Löhnefinke, without ever having considered the
claims of the moon on people, had sided totally with the moon and
were exacting its revenge on him who had despised it. It was not
foreseeable how far down they might bring their husband and
father--they had brought him down enough as it was.

Late that night, when I was back with my baker, I smoked half a
dozen pipes musing over the lessons and experiences of the previous
day and decided around midnight to send my son, currently studying
mathematics in Göttingen, a copy of the complete works of Jean Paul
Friedrich Richter* for his next birthday.




*Jean Paul Friedrich Richter (1763-1825) was born Johann Paul
Friedrich Richter and was a German romantic writer of humorous
novels and stories. He changed his name to Jean in honour of the
French romantic, Jean-Jacques Rousseau.










*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GERMAN MOONLIGHT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few individual works protected
by copyright law in the United States and most of the remainder of the
world, included in the Project Gutenberg collection with the
permission of the copyright holder. Information on the copyright owner
for this particular work and the terms of use imposed by the copyright
holder on this work are set forth at the beginning of this work.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


