The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Glory of Grace Effected by Weak Means
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Glory of Grace Effected by Weak Means

Author: J. Church

Release date: December 26, 2018 [eBook #58536]

Language: English

Credits: Transcribed from the 1822 R. Thomas edition by David Price


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GLORY OF GRACE EFFECTED BY WEAK MEANS ***


Transcribed from the 1822 R. Thomas edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org

                   [Picture: Public domain book cover]





                                   THE
                             _GLORY OF GRACE_


                         Effected by weak Means:

                          BEING THE SUBSTANCE OF

                                A SERMON,

                             PREACHED ON THE

                         DEATH OF SAMUEL CHURCH,

                           _Aged Twelve Years_.

                    On SUNDAY Evening, APRIL 14, 1822,

                              BY J. CHURCH,

                        At the Surrey Tabernacle.

                                * * * * *

    And Eli perceived that the Lord had called the Child.—1 _Sam._ iii,
    8.

    And there is hope in thine end, saith the LORD, that thy Children
    shall come
    again to their own Border.—_Jeremiah_ xxxi, 17.

                                * * * * *

                                SOUTHWARK,
             PRINTED BY R. THOMAS, RED LION STREET, BOROUGH.

                                  1822.

                                * * * * *




_A SERMON_, _&c._


    Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength,
    because of thine enemies, that thou mightest still the enemy and the
    avenger.  _Psalm_ viii, 2.

WHEN David had his mind most divinely elevated and filled with holy
thoughts of the person, work, and glory of the dear Redeemer, he burst
forth in holy admiration, joy, and praise, in this adoring language: I
will extol thee, my God, O king!  I will bless thy name for ever and
ever!  One generation shall praise thy works unto another, and shall
declare thy mighty acts: and surely the most wonderful and astonishing
act, is the everlasting salvation of lost, ruined, guilty man.  This is a
greater act than the formation of worlds, either heaven or earth.  The
salvation of one poor sinner is a more marvellous display of God, than
the creation, with all its wonders.  This salvation we are to speak of to
others, both ministers and people; and in proportion as we see our
interest in it, so are we to declare its greatness, because it is the
highest act of God, as the God of all grace, and

    Why should the wonders he has wrought
    Be lost in silence and forgot?

But babes, men, and children, let them praise the name of the Lord.

I could wish this task, on this solemn, and to me, painful occasion, had
devolved on one suitable, but supported by the Lord’s presence, upheld by
his power, and cheered with his approbation in my mind, I humbly attempt
to rehearse the wonders of his love, the riches of his grace, and the
displays of his mercy to me, and mine, and attempt, in my poor way, to
prove the glorious truth in the text: Out of the mouths of babes God has
ordained his own glory, the glory of his _love_, his _grace_, his
_mercy_, his _truth_, his _power_, his _faithfulness_, and infinite
_condescension_.  It is true that I can do no justice to the important
words, by way of a Sermon.  They contain a vast store of rich truth and
precious experience.  I must therefore merely glance at the meaning, and
shew, in as concise a manner as I can, to whom they belong, and to whom
they will, with scriptural propriety, apply.

The title of this psalm is to the chief musician upon Gittith, a psalm of
David.—Various are the conjectures of learned men on this title.  Some
think the word Gittith signifies the wine press, and the title means, To
the conqueror over the trodden wine press, wrath; and if so, we are not
at a loss to know to whom it belongs.  A psalm of, or concerning the
beloved one, to whom be glory.  Amen.

The ever blessed Redeemer is the subject of this psalm.  Hence we find it
quoted in the New Testament, and twice applied to him.  It is a
revelation of Christ, as God-man, in his headship, his empire, dominion,
and excellent name, his royalties, majesty, and glory, with his union,
relation, and interest in his people.  It is addressed to him as Jehovah,
the covenant God of the church; as one of the glorious and divine
persons, subsisting in the divine essence, with the Father and the holy
Spirit, the incomprehensible God, the most high God, blessed for
evermore; the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the first and the last.
If the first, there were none before him, and if the last, there can be
none after him.  He is the Almighty, himself has declared it; the true
God and eternal life, possessing every divine and glorious perfection,
the maker of heaven and earth, the centre, the foundation, the glory, the
beauty, and ornament of creation; and the whole is sustained by him—he is
omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent, eternal, unchangeable—the adorable I
am, that I am!—and as God in covenant, as well as absolute deity, he is
called our God, your God, their God, my Lord, and my God, the most
mighty, the great God, the living God; and must not that person have
diabolical effrontery to deny the essential and eternal Godhead of the
Lord Jesus Christ?  Such conduct clearly demonstrates that such persons
are in nature’s thickest gloom, nor can those characters give the church
or the world any scriptural account of the holy Spirit’s work upon their
hearts.  We, therefore, can never allow such unconverted persons to be
proper judges of any one truth in divine revelation.  When persons are
called by divine grace, they are brought to feel their need of just such
a saviour as Christ is, and are led to prize the infinite value of his
blood, the merit of his obedience, the power of his arm, and the love of
his heart.  But amidst the host of enemies to the person and dignity of
Christ, we humbly and gratefully unite with the Psalmist: Oh Lord, our
Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth, thy perfections, and
thy gospel, wherever it has been carried.  And how glorious it will be in
the new heavens and earth, during the millennium, his thousand years
personal reign with his people.  There _he_ has set his glory above the
heavens, his everlasting love, his holy humanity; and his church, as
considered in himself, are exalted above the ærial or starry heavens.
This is his glory, the joy of the redeemed, the wonder of elect angels,
and the envy of devils.

The Psalmist, having been led to adore Jehovah Jesus, as God in covenant,
and as God-man, the brightness of the Father’s glory, is sweetly brought
on to view him in his humiliation, final victory, and exaltation; and
while considering the heavenly bodies, their glory and greatness, with
his own insufficiency to celebrate his power, he yet adores him for that
knowledge with which his mind was favored, and exclaims, What is man that
thou art mindful of him?  This passage is quoted by the apostle, and the
whole of it is applied to Christ, as the mediator, as the Son of man,
admiring that grace which conferred so great an honor upon him, as to
choose his individual nature, his humanity, as to unite it with the
Godhead, that he should prepare it in the covenant, anoint it with the
oil of gladness above his fellows, delight in it, exalt it, and take such
providential care of it; support it under his direful sorrows, raise it,
and give it glory.  Thus the sacred Messiah is represented, as filled
with holy and admiring thoughts of the subject, and in extacy asks, What
is man? the human nature made a little lower than God, but next unto him,
and in personal union with the Son of God; a little lower than the angels
for the suffering of death, but crowned with glory and honor, as the
whole election of grace, and as the mediator of reconciliation.  Christ
by delegation, hath universal dominion over all things, visible and
invisible, nature, providence, grace, glory, earth, and hell; and this
will ever form a subject for the admiration of God’s people.  O Lord, our
Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! for as thou hast formed
thy people for thy praise, thou hast ordained the wonders of thy grace
shall be celebrated by them in time and eternity.  Out of the mouths of
babes and sucklings thou hast ordained strength, because of thine
enemies, that thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger.

We may consider these words as justly applicable to 1. David.  2, David’s
Lord.—3, The children of the temple.  4, The apostles in their
minority.—5, The experience of believers.—6, The salvation of children.
This good man was chosen and ordained for the glory of God, and for the
benefit of his people; eternally chosen in Christ to salvation; he was
impressed with the power of converting grace in very early life, and long
before he was introduced to public notice, long before his elevation to
the throne of Israel.  No doubt, while a youth, the holy Spirit took
possession of his heart, and led his mind to hope in the promised
Messiah, for life and salvation, and being selected from the busy world,
and the cares, vanities, and snares of the court, he had many sweet
moments in the sacred enjoyment of his God.  _Times_, his mind often
afterwards reflected upon with heaven-felt pleasure.  It appears God had
endowed him with astonishing skill in music, and a sublime talent for
poetry, so that he probably filled his leisure hours with close attention
to the exercise of those gifts; and as Mr. Toplady strikingly remarks, on
David’s composing this beautiful pastoral psalm: We must form to
ourselves an idea of David, the stripling, and think we see him watching
his flocks on a summer’s night, under the expanded canopy of the skies.
The air is still, the heavens are serene, the moon arrived at her full,
is pursuing her majestic silent course, the stars, like peeresses, on a
coronation solemnity, assume their brightest robes, to attend the
beauteous sovereign of the night, while both moon and stars concur to
shed a soft undazzling lustre on all the subjacent landscape.  David, at
this happy period, a blameless youth, unpoisoned with ambition, and
unfacinated by the witchcraft of court corruption, and his hands undipped
in blood, is seated on a rising hillock, or on the protuberant root of
some stately tree.  All is hushed, not a bough rustles, not a leaf
trembles to the breeze; the silent flocks are either carelessly grazing
by his side, or slumbering securely at his feet.  The birds have
suspended their songs, until waked by the superior sweetness of his
voice, and the music of his hand; for, charmed with the loveliness of the
scene, and wrapt by the holy Spirit into a seraphic flame of exalted
devotion, he has lain aside his crook—he has taken up his harp, and
transmitting to the throne of God, these grateful, these inexpressibly
beautiful lines contained in this psalm, this divine testimony of Jesus,
although perhaps wrote more than a thousand years before his incarnation.
David’s mind was illuminated with spiritual knowledge, his faith
centering in the Messiah, his hope resting on his covenant engagements,
his affections cleaving to him, his mind at this time, happy in his love;
and astonished at the infinite condescension of the God of all grace, in
looking upon him in early life; saving him from the follies of youth,
converting his soul, anointing him though a stripling, to be a king;
working deliverance for him, when by a supernatural power upon him, he
slew a lion at one time, and a bear at another.  Surely as his heart
glowed at the reflection, his mouth spoke forth the high praises of the
Lord; and as God was his strength, so he had ordained the effects of it
for the glory of his own name, that he might be praised and adored, and
that the enemies of the Lord and his people might be confounded.  This
was frequently the case in the wars of David, but particularly while a
stripling; and in comparison to men of war, he was but a babe or
suckling, when he went to meet Goliah, the gigantic champion of the
Philistines, who for forty days gave a challenge to decide the fate of
the war by a single combat, defying them to produce a man in the whole
army of Israel that dare engage him.  The Lord stirred up the mind of
this pious youth, this shepherd’s boy, the son of Jesse, to attack this
unwieldy monster, near eleven feet high, and covered with brass.  David,
armed with divine power and skill, and encouraged by his God, went forth
to meet the insulting foe, and slung a stone, which being divinely
directed, sunk into his forehead, and brought him to the ground.  Surely,
in reading the whole history, we may see the text evidently fulfilled,
and sweetly confirmed; but surely, if the power, glory, and faithfulness
of God were so eminently seen in the victory given to this babe; out of
whose mouth God was glorified, and his enemies stilled, silenced,
overcome, and defeated, how much more so in the instance of David’s Lord,
who having taken our nature into union with his divine person, is called
the Holy Child, Jesus, (Acts iv, 27) by whom God had ordained his highest
glory, the honor of all his perfections, in a way of grace, in the
salvation of innumerable millions.  And are we not often led to
contemplate the appearance of this holy child?  When but a babe, as it
were, we find him in the temple, disputing with the learned doctors
there, hearing them, and asking them questions about many points in the
laws of Moses, and probably many important questions concerning the
promised Messiah; and all that heard him were astonished at his
understanding, and answers.  Out of his sacred lips God ordained his
_truth_, his _word_, his _will_ should be known.  May we not see this
accomplished by the mouth of his ministry, miracles, praises, and
prayers?  And those who were taught of God, wondered at the gracious
words which proceeded out of his mouth.  His lips were like lilies,
dropping sweet-smelling myrrh, when he opened his mouth and taught, and
blest his people.  Every doctrine he preached, every invitation he gave,
every truth he taught, every declaration he made, every word he spoke,
was truly blessed, of everlasting importance, and for the glory of God.
His prayers and intercessions for his dear people were ever prevalent
with God, while every tear he shed, every sigh he heaved, every groan he
uttered, every stripe, and every pain, with every drop of blood which he
shed, were as so many mouths pleading for all who believe in him; and now
he lives in glory, he appears before the throne in the full virtue and
dignity of his sacrifice and obedience, pleading for all that come to God
through him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession with God for
them.  By his infinitely meritorious obedience to the law, and by his
bearing its dreadful penalties, he stilled the avenger, the curse of a
broken law, and the insulted justice of God.  He made full satisfaction
by enduring the curse, being made a curse for us, so that the threatening
being thus executed upon the surety, and justice satisfied, it can no
longer pursue that poor sinner, who flies to the city of refuge, to lay
hold on the hope set before him; and this city is divinely set forth in
these blessed Scriptures: A man shall be as an hiding place from the
wind, a refuge from the storm.  The eternal God is thy refuge.  Christ,
God-man, mediator, is the refuge.  Here the righteous flee, and are safe
from the avenger of blood.  God, revealed in a broken law, is an enemy to
sinners as such, just as a judge is to a guilty criminal; but when viewed
as reconciled, and well pleased we see him well pleased with us in him;
the Father looks upon us in Christ, views us holy, and pronounces us
righteous; as a man looking up a wall, or on any object through a red
glass, it appears red; so are we view in Christ.  Ye are complete in him,
having forgiven us all trespasses—Christ having finish the work, overcome
all enemies, disappointed Satan, bruised his head, and took away his
power; drew the envenomed dart of death, barred the mouth of hell from
his people, overcome the grave; put an end to sin, and triumphed over
death in his own dominions; he has for ever stilled the enemy and the
avenger, and fulfilled the purposes, and gracious decrees of God,
respecting the redemption of his chosen.  Worthy is the lamb that was
slain! how great his love, how infinite his condescension, how eminent
his victories, but how dreadful an evil must sin be,

    How damnable must sin appear,
    If we reflect how dear
    It cost the Saviour to atone
    For all our weight of guilt,
    For sin his precious blood was spilt.

This scripture was also divinely fulfilled, when our Lord rode in triumph
to Jerusalem, as related by the evangelist.  Having sent two of his
disciples to fetch him an ass and a colt, he sat thereon.  While vast
multitudes were collected, and attended him in the way to the city, some
laid their cloaths on the beast, others cast them on the ground for him
to ride over, and many cut down branches of palm trees to adorn his
entrance into the city, the children in the temple sung their hosannas to
the Redeemer, in harmony with the loud shouts and acclamations of the
populace.  The Pharisees, those most inveterate enemies of Christ, who
had been a little mortified just before, by the display of the power and
Godhead of Christ, in raising Lazarus from the dead, were still more so,
on beholding the triumphant entrance of Jesus, the approbation of the
people, and the anthem of the children.  They had the daring effrontery
to ask him, hearest thou what those children say?  The Saviour said, And
did you never read, that out of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou
hast perfected praise?  Here was the real literal fulfilment of this
text, for the Redeemer on this occasion, stilled and silenced those
enemies and avengers.  This triumphant entrance was indeed an emblem of
his future exaltation.  The animal which bore Him perhaps intended to
shew the characters he would make use of to bear his name in the Jewish
and Gentile worlds, and amongst all persons, high and low, rich and poor,
learned and illiterate.  The conduct of the people in casting their
cloaths from them, to shew the effect that grace has upon the heart, in
causing the soul to renounce its own righteousness, as more fit for the
feet of an ass, than to recommend it to God; while the branches of palms
which they bore were ensigns of the future victories which the
all-conquering captain of our salvation would gain over all his enemies.
And the very songs of the children, the prayers, and the praises which
would ascend from his redeemed in the temple of his church, in all future
generations.  Their hosannas were a prayer for salvation in all its
branches—save Lord, I beseech thee! and it was a wishing success, and
prosperity to his kingdom.  These two are found together in the souls of
the called children of God.  Where there is prayer for our own souls,
there is an earnest desire for the increase of the Redeemer’s kingdom,
and a hearty welcoming his visits: Blessed is he that cometh in the name
of the Lord.  This is the soul’s echo to the pleasing tidings: Behold the
king cometh unto thee.  May not this group of children, singing the
praises of the adorable Messiah, though perhaps unconscious of the
meaning, be a beautiful figure of that vast body of children who are
saved by his grace, and shout his fame, his love, and his victories, in
the temple of heaven for ever.

    Babes, thither caught from womb and breast,
    Claim’d right to sing above the rest,
    Because they found that happy shore
    They never saw nor sought before.

And surely God has ordained the praise of his own grace in the salvation
of children, and this will be confessed for ever by them, to the eternal
confusion of those who live and die despisers of salvation by grace.
Here, such enemies will be confounded in beholding the freeness, the
sovereignty, riches, and victories of electing, redeeming, calling, and
glorifying grace: for Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou hast
ordained strength, because of thine enemies.

I humbly conceive this beautiful passage may, with propriety, be applied
to the apostles, and first ministers of our Lord.  This was a name he was
pleased to them.  The great head of the church having chosen his twelve
apostles, it pleased him to call and appoint seventy disciples besides,
in allusion to Moses choosing twelve princes and seventy elders in the
wilderness.  The Lord Jesus sent them out two by two, and giving them
power to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the sick, they went forth
and did as Jesus commanded them.  Upon their return, and laying their
labours at his feet, astonished at their success, that it exceeded their
expectations, even to the casting out of devils.  At that time Jesus
rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and
earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and
hast revealed them unto babes—even so Father, for so it seemed good in
thy sight.  These ministers of Christ are called babes, weak, ignorant,
and foolish, when compared with what they should be after the day of
Pentecost, or when compared with the wise ones of this world, men of
great natural gifts, wisdom, sagacity, penetration, and skill, in natural
things; but these were babes in comparison to such knowing ones, and they
were babes in their own esteem, weak, defenceless, impotent, dependent,
and knowing little or nothing in their own opinion, yet humble, docile,
and teachable, sitting at their master’s feet, and looking to him for
divine teaching.  It was out of the mouths of these persons God had
ordained the gospel to be preached, and this is called the rod of his
strength—the power of God to salvation in every one that believeth.
Their testimony was plain and simple, but it did wonders in the world.
Nor can there be a greater proof of the divine authenticity of the word
of God, than the work it has accomplished, for in the hands of the holy
Spirit, and by the preaching of it, proud, profane, prejudiced, and
carnal persons, have been humbled, subdued, quickened, illuminated, made
holy, saved.  The wolf has been brought to lay down at the feet of the
Lamb of God, the cow and the bear.  The ministers of Christ, and a raging
tyrant by nature, have walked together! yea, a little child has led those
fierce characters into all truth! (Isaiah xi.)  Instrumentally, such
enemies have been subdued, changed, and become distinguished monuments of
sovereign, converting grace.  The New Testament is full of those
instances, and millions in heaven, and thousands upon earth, have felt
the power of a gospel ministry.  This is most strikingly remarked by the
apostle: But if all prophecy, or preach, and there came in one that
believeth not, or unlearned, he is convinced of all, judged of all, and
thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and so falling down on
his face he will worship, and report that God is in you of a truth,
because the same Almighty power is put forth in the word, that called
light out of darkness at the creation, and that called Lazarus from the
tomb.  Nothing short of this, can produce any good effect upon the
understanding, the will, the affections, the mind, and conscience of a
sinner.  What powerful reproofs, cutting convictions, consoling
influences, supporting and delivering power, have been felt by the Lord’s
people, in hearing and reading the gospel of Jesus, whether in the Old or
the New Testament.  And this has cast out Satan, and sin’s dominion,
tyranny, power guilt, and distress, from the soul; has answered many an
accusation, freed from many a doubt, and overcome the enemy and the
avenger.  This is no small mortification to that implacable foe, to see
the astonishing power and success of the gospel, and himself, at times,
put to flight, by a simple act of faith in God’s truth.

    Oh! I have seen the day,
       When with a single word,
    God helping me to say
       My trust is in the Lord;
    My soul has slain a thousand foes,
    Fearless of all that could oppose.

For so the promise runs, and so the victorious believer has found it.
One of you shall chase a thousand (by the word,) and two of you (by faith
and prayer), shall put ten thousand to flight.

Blessed be God for the gospel, and for its power and influence upon our
hearts.  This is the sweet evidence of our eternal election of God, for
our gospel came not unto you in word only, but in power; in the Holy
Ghost, and in much assurance.  It is in this way, even a babe in Christ
has stilled the enemy and the avenger.  The people of the Most High are
called babes; and little children, being born again, not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, but of God—created anew in Christ Jesus, unto good
works, which God hath before ordained, that we should walk in them.  This
new birth is produced by the almighty power of God, the holy making
Spirit.  It is an evidence of everlasting love, and of the soul’s
interest in the blood and righteousness of Christ; and none have any
right to consider themselves in Christ, who are strangers to the new
birth.  It is the gracious indwelling of the holy Spirit in his divine
influences—forming a new man of grace—a new heart—a right spirit,
infusing every holy principle, in conformity to the image, of Christ.
When this work is begun in most of God’s children, it is hard to tell,
but some blessed effects of it may be clearly seen.  Such souls, may be
long under the terror of the law, the bondage of their spirit, the fears
of death, the dread of judgment, eternity and hell, yet the Lord hears
their groans, sees their oppressions, tears, and fears, and will in due
time, bring them out of prison.  Some, indeed, are led on more smoothly,
but none are left ignorant of their lost state by nature, their
condemnation by the law, and the value of Christ, as the atonement and
righteousness of his people.  Such babes are humble, simple, sincere, and
teachable; they desire the breast of consolation, from heart-felt misery;
they desire the sincere milk of the word, not only the word, but the
_milk_ of it, that they may grow thereby into a deeper knowledge of
Christ, till their faith is grown up to full assurance, and their hope
big with expectations; till a sense of divine love casts out all doubts
and fears, which sadly torment their minds, and till they know the whole
armour of God; and surely there can be no actual enjoyment with Christ,
or entering into truth, or the privileges of the gospel, or into eternal
glory, till this new birth takes place.  There can be neither _seeing_
nor _entering_ the kingdom; there may be a superficial knowledge, and
plenty of talk about truth; but it is a cordial reception of it in the
heart, and digesting it in the mind, that will ever produce any good
effect, either in the soul, or in the conversation.  And except we become
as little children, we can in no wise enter the kingdom; but having been
blessed with this divine change in the heart, confession is to be made to
the glory of God.  This is the ordinance of Heaven: there is to be an
acknowledgement of the truth, a declaration of what God has done for us
to the church, to one another; and when prudent opportunity offers,
before the world, by words, and by facts, open and visible, sincere and
hearty, likewise in prayer; and praise, when the Lord is pleased to give
us strength so to do, that others may be led to see that there is a
reality in religion, and may be blessed with the strength of grace to
seek the Lord, and glorify God in the day of their visitation: in so
doing, you still the enemy, and by a God-glorifying conduct, put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men, the enemies of God and truth.  And
where the conscience is made tender, every thing that is contrary to
this, is a source of inconceivable grief.  These babes are at times, also
enabled to silence Satan himself, with all the accusations of a
distressed and burdened conscience, when the atonement, obedience, love,
person, offices and promises, invitations and faithfulness of the dear
Redeemer is powerfully brought into the mind, by the holy Spirit, and
strength given to baffle the enemy, with his satanic suggestions, as a
young man did lately, upon his death bed, depending upon, and pleading
the great work of Christ, for his acceptance with God, just going into
eternity.  The enemy plagued him with this question continually: ’Tis
true Christ died for sinners! but how do you know he died for you?  The
young man had strength given him to answer the enemy as fast as he
plagued him!  But, Satan, how do you know he did not?  Thus he gained the
victory over the enemy, and died in sweet confidence.  Thanks be to God,
who giveth us the victory, for out of the mouths of such babes he has
ordained his own glory.  It is also evident, that God is glorified by the
displays of the riches, power, and freeness of grace, in the salvation of
children.  This must be favor indeed, as such can perform no act of
demotion to recommend them to God! nor can their innocence do it, as they
are conceived in sin, born, or shapen in iniquity, under the imputation
of the guilt of Adam, and with the seeds of every sin in them that can be
committed in this world, though guilty of no actual transgression, yet by
nature they are sinners, destitute of the image of God, and under guilt.
How great that grace which chose them—how infinitely dear that blood
which redeemed them—and how condescending that holy Spirit that takes
possession of them before their little souls leave their bodies: they are
to be considered, passively, the capable subjects of converting grace—and
who can tell what passes on the soul of a departing infant, under the
operations of the spirit of God?  Millions of infants are, doubtless,
before the throne of God, and the Lamb, praising, adoring, and blessing
that mercy that saved them so early, not on account of their natural
purity, nor their religious descent—not because their parents were pious
persons, for this can make no difference—nor because they were
superstitiously baptized, as it is erroneously called, but because God
has set his love upon them—because they are interested in the covenant of
grace—because the Redeemer has died for them—his righteousness is imputed
to them—and because the holy Spirit takes possession of their
hearts—sanctifies them in a moment—and because God has ordained the glory
of himself, in the everlasting salvation and happiness of those who are
not able to save themselves.  I acknowledge the salvation of all infants
has been a subject of dispute, amongst many, and Satan has taken the
advantage to distress many a parent upon the subject.  But secret things
belong to the Lord, our God, the things that are revealed belong to us.
Here we want grace to rest, yet I am bold to affirm, that we have no one
solid proof of the everlasting destruction of an infant.  It is no where
positively _asserted_ nor yet _implied_.  I am now speaking of babes.
Millions have been destroyed in public calamities, and died a corporeal
death, but not punished with an everlasting death; nor can we find any
infants amongst those of whom it is affirmed, that they suffer the
vengeance of eternal fire.  It was David’s consolation that his child was
saved, though born under adulterous circumstances.  I shall go to him,
but he shall not return to me.  This does not refer to the grave, for
there could be but little pleasure in that thought, but to eternal rest.
The pious Shunamite woman said of the death of her son, It is well.  And
the Lord promised that that son of Jereboam should go to his grave,
because in that child there was found some good thing toward the Lord God
of Israel.  Thousands of dear children were massacred by order of Herod,
with an intent to murder the Redeemer.  These dear children were the
first martyrs for Christ, and the Lord assures us of their salvation,
(Jeremiah xxxi, 15, 16, 17.) to which I refer you.  The _border_ there
spoken of, is most undoubtedly the millennium, the heavenly country,
where these precious stones would adorn the crown of the Redeemer, and be
everlasting monuments of the wonders of his grace.  These dear children
will to eternity, acknowledge how infinitely indebted they are to the
adorable trinity in unity, for so great a salvation.

    And now they range the heavenly plains,
    And sing his love in melting strains;
    Or, overwhelm’d with rapture sweet,
    Sink down adoring at his feet.

I come now to speak of the closing scene of my much-loved son.  On this
subject I want much fortitude and power from on high, to sustain my
deeply affected heart.  None but God knows the strange mixture of my
feelings, grief and gratitude, sorrow and wonder.  I have not room here
to enlarge on the subject of nature and affection, and the feelings these
ties inspire in the loss of one so dear to my heart.  Cruel memory recals
to mind a thousand endearments, in such departed worth, but I fall at the
footstool of divine mercy, and bless the God of all grace, that I am not
sorrowing as one without hope.  Many whom I am now addressing, knew him
well, and all who knew him loved him.  He was beloved of his God—blest
from infancy with peculiar powers, which no doubt would have shown
brightly in life, had he been spared.  But though the subject of deep
affliction, yet grace shone in his mind, and its radiance was sweetly
emitted to an eminent manner, as his afflictions abounded.  He was the
last son of his dear mother, who is in glory; and being favored at his
birth with a peculiar answer to prayer, I adopted the method of ancient
believers, on extraordinary occasions, and called him Samuel, _heard of
God_! and so he proved to be.  About six years ago, he broke his leg,
which afterwards produced great weakness through the fright; the pain,
and long confinement.  This had a serious effect upon his whole mass of
blood, which afterwards shewed itself in several abscesses.  These
baffled all the skill of medicine, and though well attended by medical
persons, and most tenderly and carefully nursed, and watched by day and
by night, yet God had determined to bring him to glory, at nearly twelve
years of age, nor can I wish him back again.

    To be with dire afflictions tost and tore,
    The suffering little boy he was before!

But during the last months he was with his kind affectionate, attentive
Aunt and Uncle, who have been long in the ways of God, and have had a
most clear and blessed experience of grace and truth themselves, they
were often highly delighted to see the work of grace so eminently
displayed in their dear little suffering nephew.  Many precious things he
said to me, but as a father, perhaps it might be attributed to weakness,
or an inordinate affection for a son, if I made any remarks.  ’Tis
however very pleasing to me that his dear Aunt was enabled to seize a few
opportunities, secretly, to pen down some of those words which fell from
him at times.  A few only, can be asserted here, but which plainly
indicates the work of grace upon his heart, by the confession of his
lips, and sweetly proving, that out of the mouth of this dear child God
had ordained his own glory.

The contents of the following letter, sent to me by his Aunt, I beg leave
also to insert, without a single comment of my own.

                                * * * * *

DEAR BROTHER,

Believing you would be desirous of knowing the dealings of the Lord with
your dear child, I have endeavored to preserve a small part of what fell
from his lips during the last weeks of his afflicted life.  I say a small
part, because the whole, had it not been for the necessary and close
attention to his person, would have swelled a volume.

Previous to the time when he was confined to his bed, which was the
latter end of December, when I had an opportunity to set with him, he
would often talk on divine subjects, and appeared deeply interested in
the things that pertained to his own salvation.  He mentioned several
sermons he had heard Dr. Andrews, of Walworth, preach, but particularly
one, from, Oh my Dove, that art in the cleft of the rock.  He ran through
the several ideas that was advanced, with great correctness and interest.
At another time when we were conversing about eternal things, he said,
Aunt, I should not be afraid to die, if I was sure I had an interest in
Christ!  You know it is possible to be deceived, and many people are.  I
never said so much to any one as I have to you.  I talked to my dear
father, and he answered me much the same as you have.

About the middle of February, when helping him out of bed, very helpless,
and in great pain, he said, Aunt, I seem to have a hope that I shall be
saved!  Do you not think that answer to prayer is some evidence? and I am
sure that many of my poor simply prayers have been answered.

February 26.—He held a truly interesting conversation with his Uncle,
expressing the strongest desire to know if he was truly drawn to Christ!
On the evidences being given to him, he appeared much refreshed, and
said, It may be when I am nearer to death that the Lord may give me a
full assurance.  He often said how good the Lord is; I have more to be
thankful for than to complain of!  Once he said, Well Aunt, who can tell
but the Lord may cure me? and if he does not, he will do a great deal
better for me!—But for want of time, I must omit many very blessed
things, and relate what more particularly transpired towards the close.
The few last days in February, and the first and second of March, he was
in great pain, and there was an evident alteration for the worst.  In the
night of the second of March, he said, Oh! affliction! affliction!  My
poor body is quite worn out!  Oh! I wish for more patience and
resignation.  Aunt, I had rather lay here, with all my pains, than be
running about the streets, in health, like many boys I know, cursing and
swearing, and sinning against God.  In the same night, he said, Oh! I
hope we shall meet in Heaven!  On my expressing the same hope, he cried
out, Ah! but I want more than hope!  I want assurance!  Oh! I hope the
Lord will sanctify this affliction.

Lord’s day, March the third.—He asked me to read.  After reading the
word, and some hymns, he smiled, and said, How precious that is!  I wish
you had nothing else to do but to talk and read to me.  In the evening of
that day, he was in great pain.  From twelve at night till three in the
morning, his tongue was like the pen of a ready-writer.  I said to him,
My dear, have you long had serious thoughts about your soul?  He
answered, No, Aunt, not any thing particularly, till within a
twelvemonth.  How was it at the beginning with you?  Why, I was very much
alarmed for fear I should go to hell!  I used to have such dark horror on
my mind as I cannot describe!  I used to cry till I fell asleep, and then
I used to dream it was the day of judgment, and wake very much terrified!
I dreamt this a great many times.  I cannot tell you what I went through,
with the dark horror at day, and the terrifying dreams at night.  Did you
not feel at times, hopes springing up, that the Lord would save you,
through Christ Jesus?  Yes, very often, when I have been hearing my
father, and Dr. Andrews, but afterwards I have been much distressed, for
fear they were not right hopes.  I never talked about what I felt.  I
thought people might think as I was a child that I heard a great deal
about religion, it was what I had picked up—then added, with a strong
voice and great satisfaction, But I know that what I picked up _then_,
does me good _now_!  Aunt, the last time I sung that hymn, Ah! I shall
soon be dying, I never sung so in my life!  I sung and cried!  I sung as
if I had another voice besides my own—I was so full of joy.—I spoke to
Him of the great love of God, in calling him to the knowledge of himself,
and bringing him to Jesus, for life and salvation.  He replied, Oh! it is
a great love.  I keep you awake, but my heart is so full that I cannot
help talking.  This is but a small part of what passed on that, to me,
memorable night.

March the 4th.—A young man was saying, when he was about thirteen years
of age, he was so ill that used to pray to die.  Samuel remarked after he
was gone, That he did not know what death was, nor what it was to have a
hell in his heart, or else he would not talk so.—Aunt, what a very
precious hymn that is: All the fitness he requireth, is to feel your need
of Him.—Oh! I hope I shall be able to say, as dear Mrs. Lawson said, when
near death, I know in whom I have believed.—I hope my father will not
grieve when I die—why should he?  He often said, O that my warfare was
ended.

March the 5th.—Very comfortable all day.  About eleven at night, he
suffered much.  He said, Oh! I am quite worn out!  I hope I shall not be
long.  It seems as if I could leave all now—Aunt, I can leave you!  I
hope I shall not suffer much at last—do you think I shall?  I do not
think you will my dear, but in all your sufferings the Lord will support
you; you are not without sweet support now, are you?  Oh, no!  I am
greatly supported, What a mercy it is to have promises to rest on.  Oh! I
want to go—not so much to get rid of suffering, as to see Jesus, which is
better.  Adding, Aunt, this is a comfort to me, you will not be long
after me, nor uncle neither.—Once, when holding him up in my arms, he
feared I should let him fall and cried out, Hold me up, hold me up!
After a short pause, in a very expressive manner, said, Hold thou me up,
and I shall be safe; and then to me, As thy day is, so shall thy strength
be.

One day, he said, I have longed when I have seen people go down into the
water to be baptized, to go too.  He was answered, That there was no
salvation in water.  He replied, Oh! I know that, but you know it is so
sweet to follow the Lord!  At another time, he said, Aunt, I have a
secret hope, that if I was to recover, the Lord would never let me forget
his goodness to me; these afflictions would be useful to me through life.
Once, when in great pain, he said, Its only weaning—I want a great deal
of weaning.  Oh what a mercy to be reconciled to the will of the Lord.
The Lord is very good.

The following Saturday, when lifting him into bed, he said, Oh! Aunt, may
the Lord give me patience, and you strength.  I answered, I believe he
will.  And though we could mot see the end of the Lord, in thus
afflicting him, yet if not before, we should in the light of glory.  He
answered, What a mercy to know we are going there.  I hope my dear you
know for yourself, you are going there?  He replied with great firmness,
Yes, I can say I believe I am.—And last night (alluding to some hours of
great pain and agony) he said, If I could have spoken, though my poor
body was so much afflicted, and my patience almost gone, I could have
said, I know I am going to glory!  He added, If I am not deceived, I hope
I am not.  Oh! what a great thing to be reconciled to the will God.  Oh!
pray for me, that I may have more patience to hold out.

March 26.—For several hours in great extremity of pain, but declared
himself happy in soul.—Something having been said about faith, he
answered, Ah! it is easy enough to talk about faith, but to be afflicted
as I am, then we see how little faith we have got.  Oh! Aunt, pray for
me?  Ask the Lord, Oh! do, do!  Observe, this latter expression, Ask the
Lord, was continually his request.  I once said to him, then you believe
the Lord heareth prayer?  He answered with great quickness, Yes, and
answering too.  Being encouraged not to fear, he said, But sometimes I
have fears!  But why art thou cast down, Oh my soul?  This day, when much
distressed in body, he said, But why should I complain?  What did the
Lord suffer?

    He sunk beneath our heavy woes
    To raise us to a throne;
    There’s not a gift his hand bestows,
    But cost his heart a groan!

March 28.—He said, Aunt, I am not desirous to live, but I hope I shall
not go off in agony.  Oh! Oh! let me be the subject of your prayers,
continually!  Oh! spend all your time in wrestling for me.

Lord’s day, March 31.—In the afternoon a few friends came to see him, and
a few hours he was cheerful, and free from pain.  About ten, his pains
became intolerable.  It was a time of great distress.  Between eleven and
twelve, he became more easy, and a sweet colour appeared in his
countenance.  He said, Aunt, when I am in glory I shall sing as loud as
any one, The crowned Lord of all.  Oh! I long to go—I long to be singing
hallelujah!  He then sung Hallelujah, hallelujah!  He then repeated the
whole of the hymn, Grace, ’tis a charming theme; laying a particular
emphasis on the words, Wrote my name—repeating (_My name_).  Oh! I long
to be singing.  Crown him Lord of all!  Calling to his Uncle in the next
room, to come, Crown him Lord of all!  On its being complied with, he
joined with the sweetest voice.  On our retiring to the next room, he
sung alone, in a soft voice, a great part of the hymn, called Gethsemane.
He then called, Uncle; come and sing again?  On his replying, My dear; I
am very low, he said, never mind, I will help you!  He then sweetly
joined in, Grace, ’tis a charming sound.  At the conclusion, he said, It
is all of grace.  Oh! I long to Crown him Lord of all!  He requested his
Uncle to go to prayer?  When concluded, he shook him by the hand, saying,
I thank you, I thank you.—Monday.—Extremely low all day.  On turning him
in bed, he said, Oh! what should I do without you? but instantly added,
in a louder voice, What should I do without the Lord?

Tuesday, April 2nd.—A day full of pain and distress indeed.  About noon,
he said, I shall not be long here!  I expressed a hope of meeting him in
glory.  He answered, Yes, I do not fear that.  I replied, yes, for He is
able to save to the uttermost.  He replied, If he has not saved you, he
never will—adding, Saved from the beginning of the world!  What a mercy
Aunt, to be in Christ?—Wednesday.—Very low all day.  Several times in the
day he expressed a desire to depart, and be with Christ.  He cried out,
Oh! this poor sinful body—a body of sin and death!—Late at night, he
sighed, and said, Lord, what is man!—Thursday.—Suffered much all day.
About noon, he said, To-morrow is Good Friday—Ah! what did the Lord
suffer for us?  And in a very emphatic manner, said, Oh
Gethsemane!—Friday.—Evidently much worse.  About noon he was very
restless.  I said, My dear, who can place your pillow easy?  He replied,
Only one God—must be my physician.  About noon, he said, Oh! pray to the
Lord to take me very soon?  Then you are willing to go to him?  He
replied, Yes, before tea time, if it was the Lord’s will!  Oh that I
could fall asleep in his arms.  Oh! wrestle Aunt, Oh! wrestle!  On
uttering a few short petitions in his behalf, he affectionately thanked
me, saying, Oh that our united prayers may be answered.  About three
o’clock, he said, Oh! why doth he tarry so long?  Oh that _his chariot_
was waiting for me!  On assuring him that was the case—that the holy
angels were surrounding him, to convey him before the throne of God and
the Lamb, he cried, Oh that he would come quickly!  Oh! to hear the sound
of his chariot wheels!  Why doth he tarry so long?  When about to fall
asleep in his arms, he whispered:

    Cease fond nature, cease thy strife,
    Let me languish into life.

The remainder of the evening spent in great pain, but fervent expressions
after the coming of the Lord, often crying, Oh! ask the Lord why is his
chariot so long in coming!  About three in the morning, he fell into a
sleep, and without pain or groan, sweetly fell asleep in Jesus.

Thus terminated the life of this believer in Jesus.  May you, and I, and
all his dear friends, be partakers of the like precious faith.  Amen.

                                              Your’s, most affectionately,

                                                              _E. Bonner_.

                                * * * * *

Farewell, my dear son—and while I embalm thy memory with tears, a Gospel
hope points me to a time when I shall meet you again, in the sacred
blissful presence of a reigning Saviour, and a smiling God.  Amen.

                                * * * * *

                                  FINIS.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GLORY OF GRACE EFFECTED BY WEAK MEANS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


