The Project Gutenberg eBook of The pearl of patience
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The pearl of patience
        Or, Maurice, and Kitty Maynard

Author: Madeline Leslie

Release date: January 6, 2024 [eBook #72640]

Language: English

Original publication: United States: A. F. Graves


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PEARL OF PATIENCE ***

Transcriber's note: Unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.

[Illustration: MRS. LESLIE'S BIBLE PEARLS.]



                     The Pearl of Patience:

                               OR,

                   MAURICE, AND KITTY MAYNARD.


                   _BY MRS. MADELINE LESLIE._



       _"To them who by patient continuance in well-doing,_
   _seek for glory, and honor, and immortality; eternal life."_
                                                     ROM. 2:7.



                              BOSTON:
                    PUBLISHED BY A. F. GRAVES,
                           20 CORNHILL.



   Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1868, by
                         REV. A. R. BAKER,
 In the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the District of
                          Massachusetts.



                         PRATT BROTHERS,
                    Stereotypers and Printers,
                      37½ CORNHILL, BOSTON.



                         MRS. LESLIE'S
                         BIBLE PEARLS.

                       Series for Boys.

VOL. I. THE PEARL OF LOVE.

VOL. II. THE PEARL OF CHARITY.

VOL. III. THE PEARL OF OBEDIENCE.

VOL. IV. THE PEARL OF PENITENCE.

VOL. V. THE PEARL OF HOPE.

VOL. VI. THE PEARL OF PATIENCE.



                         MRS. LESLIE'S
                         BIBLE PEARLS.

                       Series for Girls.

VOL. I. THE PEARL OF FAITH.

VOL. II. THE PEARL OF DILIGENCE.

VOL. III. THE PEARL OF MEEKNESS.

VOL. IV. THE PEARL OF FORGIVENESS.

VOL. V. THE PEARL OF CONTENTMENT.

VOL. VI. THE PEARL OF PEACE.



                                     To

                  FRANK RANDALL, RUTH, MAY, RANDOLPH MORGAN,
                           AND JAMES WALDINGFIELD,

                                CHILDREN OF

                       D. F. APPLETON, ESQ., NEW YORK,

            THESE "BIBLE PEARLS" ARE AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED

                               BY THE AUTHOR.



                                  CONTENTS.


 CHAPTER I. MAURICE'S SPELLING LESSON

 CHAPTER II. MAURICE'S TOOTHACHE

 CHAPTER III. KITTY MAYNARD

 CHAPTER IV. GRANDMA'S SETTING HEN

 CHAPTER V. VISIT TO KITTY

 CHAPTER VI. KITTY'S STORY

 CHAPTER VII. MAURICE LEARNING PATIENCE

 CHAPTER VIII. JIMMY BARNARD'S SIN

 CHAPTER IX. CONCLUSION



                       The Pearl of Patience.

CHAPTER I.

MAURICE'S SPELLING LESSON.

"THERE'S the breakfast bell, Maurice."

The little fellow was sitting on the floor, trying to the knot in his
shoe, which he had twitched off in haste the before. He looked up as
Nurse spoke, with an impatient scowl.

Presently his mamma came from her room and seeing him still undressed,
exclaimed,—

"What, Maurice! Not ready yet?"

"I can't untie my shoe, mamma."

She took up the shoe, glanced at the knot, and smiled as she let it
fall again.

"I don't think you've tried, my dear. It isn't a hard knot."

"I did try ever so much; but it wouldn't come out of the tangle."

"Shall I do it for him?" asked Nurse, who had almost spoiled the boy by
indulgence.

"No, Hannah. He must learn to be patient in conquering these little
difficulties, else how will he ever get through the great ones, he will
certainly meet in life."

"Come, Maurice, I'm quite ashamed that a boy nearly five years old
should sit moping on the floor, when one minute of patient effort would
untie your shoe. Nurse, has Cook carried in the coffee and muffins yet?"

"Oh, mamma! Are there muffins for breakfast?"

"Not for tardy boys, certainly. However, I will allow you five minutes
to finish your dressing; and as Nurse has given you your bath, and
curled your hair, you can easily be ready, if you try."

Maurice caught up his shoe in a hurry, began to twitch and pull; looked
as if he was going to cry, but with a sudden thought bent his whole
energies to the work, and laughed aloud when it was accomplished.

"I'm glad you didn't help me, Hannah," he exclaimed, joyfully. "I can
pull knots out now, just as easy."

"To be sure you can," she answered, giving him a kiss, and hurrying him
away to be in time for his favorite muffins.

A few hours later he sat in his little study-chair, his spelling-book
open before him, while he was gazing at the cat trying to catch her own
tail.

"See, mamma!" he exclaimed, laughing. "Isn't puss silly to run round
that way?"

"I have nothing to do with kitty now. She is not in my school," replied
the lady, with a smile. "I suppose you can say your lesson very
perfectly, as you have time to watch cats."

Maurice blushed and caught up his book.

"F-o-l-l-y, folly," he spelled, in a whisper, then stopped again.

"Mamma, what's the use of learning to spell so many words?"

"Some other time I will explain that," she answered, pleasantly.

"H-o-l-l-y, holly," he went on. "Is that holly that grows on trees?"

"Yes, my dear, it is a small tree or rather shrub."

"I can say my lesson now, mamma." He held out the book.

"Can you spell the word patience?"

"That isn't in my lesson."

"I'm afraid not."

"Why do you say afraid, mamma?"

"Because I want very much that you should learn the meaning of the
word; and then perhaps you would try to practise it. Now spell after
me, p-a-t-i-e-n-c-e."

"It's hard to remember," he said, with a blush.

"Now for the meaning, Maurice. This morning it meant, 'try, try again
to untie your shoe.' Now it means 'study over and over your lesson, not
allowing yourself to be weary or diverted from your book, until you
have learned it thoroughly.' The Bible speaks of 'patient continuance
in well-doing,' and tells us to 'let patience have her perfect work.'"

"I am sorry to say, Maurice, that you are sadly wanting in patience
and—"

"Mamma, I did get out the knot," exclaimed the boy, his cheeks
crimsoning.

"Yes, at last you applied yourself to the business; if you had done
that at first you would have prevented the reproof your papa gave you
for tardiness, which he so much dislikes."

Without another word, Maurice set himself to his task with a will. Over
and over again he whispered the words, his finger patiently following
down the column. Not even when kitty, tired of her play, came to him
with a plaintive "meow," did he turn his eyes from his book.

"Well done, Maurice!" exclaimed his mother, who had been watching him
with a smile. "I may as well get out the memorandum-book, for I'm sure
of having to put down the word perfect this morning."

He stood erect before her, his hands folded behind his back. He had
conquered his lesson and was very happy in the thought that he had
conquered himself. It was no matter now, whether his mamma went
straight on with the words, or commenced at the bottom of the line, or
whether she skipped about, he was sure of every syllable.

"It's a pleasure to hear such a lesson as that," said the lady.

"I'm going to be patient all the time, mamma," he cried, jumping up and
down. "Now I'm going to get my geography."

Every lesson that morning was well learned, and the boy who usually
dragged away the whole day at his studies, to his mother's great
annoyance, now fairly earned the right to a long recess.

All in the family, from Cook in the kitchen, to Tom the stable-boy,
knew by Maurice's bright, happy face, that something unusual had
happened, and rejoiced with him in his efforts to learn patience.



CHAPTER II.

MAURICE'S TOOTHACHE.

MRS. SEYTON did not expect that her son would conquer his old habit in
a day, nor a week. She truly rejoiced that he had learned even by one
day's experience the pleasure and reward of "patient continuance in
well doing;" and she encouraged him by every means in her power. Before
the close of the week, however, he began to return to his old habit,
repeating over and over again, in querulous tones,—

"It's so hard, mamma, I can't learn it. Mamma, this name isn't on the
map."

"Have you looked thoroughly?"

"I think I have; but the print is so fine."

Or he would declare half-a-dozen times,—

"I've learned it, mamma; will you please hear me, and let me go and
play?"

When the truth was, that he had not given the lesson one moment
of real, patient study.


A few weeks after this, Maurice came to his mamma's chamber in the
middle of the night, crying with the toothache.

The lady, like a kind mother as she was, instantly arose and applied
some balsam to the decayed spot, stuffed in some cotton to keep the air
out, took him into her own bed, and told him to try and go to sleep.

But the child was thoroughly roused, and the pain being somewhat
relieved, he wanted to talk. His papa and mamma were very sleepy. When
he found they did not answer he would cry out again,—

"Oh, my tooth! How it does ache! It's awful bad, mamma!"

"Try to bear it as patiently as you can," urged mamma, softly. "If you
keep still, you'll fall asleep and forget the pain. You know papa has
to go to town very early to-morrow."

But Maurice did not feel inclined to bear it patiently. He thought his
father and mother and the whole family ought to be doing something to
make him better: if he couldn't sleep, he thought they ought to keep
awake too.

At last, his father, quite worn out with his complaints, went off to
another room; his mother sung a soothing lullaby and toward morning he
fell into a sound slumber.

"Come, Maurice," said Mr. Seyton, at breakfast, "I'm going to take you
into town with me. The dentist will soon cure your toothache."

"Oh, papa!" screamed the boy, holding his face with both hands. "Please
don't; it doesn't ache at all, now."

"Let me look at it."

Maurice reluctantly opened his mouth.

"There is a small decayed spot," he said to his wife; "but nothing to
make such a fuss about as he did last night. The dentist will either
fill it or take it out."

"Pull it, do you mean, papa? Oh, I can't have it pulled!"

"Hush that, now! You made enough noise last night to have a dozen teeth
pulled."

"I wont say another word, papa, if it aches again. I'll stay in bed,
and try to go to sleep."

"All very fine, I dare say; but I can't risk being kept awake half the
night, and made unfit for business by the headache; and there's your
mamma too, who sang herself hoarse because you wouldn't put a little
patience into exercise; and now her eyes look terribly inflamed, with
the gas burning directly in her face. Come, eat your breakfast quick;
I'm in a hurry."

The boy's plate was piled with fritters; and he was very fond of syrup
on them; but his mamma cautioned him that the sweet might make his
tooth ache again.

"I don't believe it will," he exclaimed. "It's all well now."

"Take syrup, if you like," said his father, "but if your teeth aches,
don't let us hear a word of complaint."

He had scarcely taken the first mouthful when he gave a shriek, and ran
away from the table. He had no appetite for any more cakes, and in a
few minutes found himself on his way to town.



CHAPTER III.

KITTY MAYNARD.

ALL that I have about Maurice happened in the spring. Early in the
summer he went with his mamma to the country to spend three months with
grandma and grandpa Seyton.

Papa's business kept him in the city, but he came down to F— every
Saturday night, and promised to try hard for a two weeks' vacation in
August.

Almost the first question Mrs. Seyton asked was,—

"How is Kitty Maynard?"

"About the same," was grandma's answer. "She has convulsions nearly
every day; but she's the most patient, cheerful creature I ever heard
of."

"Who is Kitty Maynard, mamma? And what is the matter with her?"

"I must go and see her to-morrow," remarked the lady, not answering her
son. "Indeed I generally make my first visit there."

"The pieces of silk and velvet you sent, did her a world of good,"
grandma went on. "I believe the cushions and knickknacks she's made of
them have brought her in near thirty dollars. Poor thing, you ought to
have seen her when I unrolled the bundle and laid 'em out, one by one.
You'd have thought she'd had a present of a mine of gold. She worked
and worked with her poor deformed hands, trying to hold them up and
plan what they'd make, till my heart fairly ached. And all the time not
a lisp of complaint or impatience."

"Her happy disposition makes her an object of envy," remarked Maurice's
mamma.

"'Tisn't her happy disposition," urged grandpa, coming into the room
time enough to hear the last words. "That is, if you're speaking of
Kitty Maynard, though, no doubt, a cheerful, even temper does help
people to go through trouble. She has something better than that for
her support: a spirit of grace in her heart, which enables her to be
patient in tribulation, remembering that all her pains are ordered
by One who watches over the humblest of His creatures with infinite
tenderness."

"Mamma, may I go with you?" asked Maurice eagerly, as the lady was
tying on her bonnet the next morning, preparatory to her walk.

"Yes, my dear; and if grandma is willing; we will pick a bouquet of
mignonette, roses and verbenas. Kitty always liked flowers."

"Gather as many as you please, Mary," the old lady said, laughing. "I
don't know who has a better right, as you send all the plants. Yes,
Kitty thinks a deal of a bouquet. I've got a bowl of strawberries too,
that Maurice may take if he has a mind."

"What's that in your bundle, mamma?"

"It's a loose gown, made of calico, so that it can be washed. I saw the
print in the store and thought it just the thing for Kitty." She untied
the bundle and held the robe up for inspection.

It was a neat, tasteful pattern of French calico; a tiny rose and bunch
of leaves on a drab ground, trimmed down the front and sleeves with
stripes of print to match.

"Just Kitty's style!" said grandma approvingly. "This will be one of
her happy days, marked with a white stone, as she calls it."

But the old lady was mistaken. It was one of Kitty's worst days. Ever
since light she had been in dreadful convulsions, more severe than she
had had for months.

Maurice and his mother walked to the side of the bed through the open
door; and no one seemed at leisure to notice them. There lay the poor,
deformed girl on a couch in the centre of the small, neat room, at
the foot of which her mother sat weeping, while two girls, sisters of
Kitty, assisted the doctor in keeping her as much as possible from
hurting herself.

Maurice grew so pale at the sight of her terrible suffering, her head
and feet sometimes knocking together, that his mother whispered him to
put his bouquet and strawberries on the table and stay outside till she
came.

It was near twenty minutes before she joined him; and then poor Kitty
had sunk into a stupor. Maurice glanced timidly in his mamma's face
as, just motioning him to follow, she started for home. There was an
expression on it which he did not understand.

It was true that Mrs. Seyton was deeply affected at the sight she had
witnessed. As she stood there, watching the distorted features, the
eyes rolled up in agony, the teeth set, she asked herself,—

"Could I endure such suffering without a murmur? Could I say with a
smile of resignation, such as I have often seen her wear, 'It is my
Heavenly Father, my best-loved, and long-tried friend who sends the
chastisement; and shall I not patiently endure what it is his will to
afflict?'"

[Illustration]



CHAPTER IV.

GRANDMA'S SETTING HEN.

"I THOUGHT Kitty Maynard was an old woman, mamma," said Maurice, just
before they reached home.

"Kitty is only nineteen years old," the lady answered. "I remember her,
when she was as healthy and active as you. Sometime I will tell you her
story. Now I feel too sad to talk with you about anything."

"Will she eat the strawberries, mamma?"

"Perhaps so, by and by. Her sister, Hepsey Maynard, told me she was
very fond of them, and that they agreed well with her."

"You have made a long call," remarked grandma, as they entered. "I
suppose you waited to see Kitty dressed in her new gown."

"No, mother, she didn't know me to-day. I just hung it on a hook in the
closet and said nothing about it."

"Is she worse than usual?"

"I have never seen her so dreadfully convulsed. The doctor says she
can't endure it long. He has decided to try the effect of a new method
of treatment."

Maurice soon ran out to improve his holiday by visiting his favorite
haunts around the farm. Ponto, the old dog, was sunning himself in
front of his comfortable house, and came lazily forward, blinking his
eyes, to meet the little fellow. It was evident, even to the boy, that
his days for frolic and fun were over. After a few loving pats and kind
words:

"Poor Ponto! Good fellow!" Maurice ran on toward the barn.

Here he found plenty to amuse him. There were a couple of kids with
their anxious mother bleating because they were out of her sight.
Maurice laughed heartily as he watched their manœuvres. The old goat
was tied to a ring in the stall; but the kids, being free to run where
they liked, kept her worrying for their safety by hiding beyond the
high enclosure, or creeping over a huge pile of straw bedding.

The dinner bell rang twice before he heard it. He could scarcely
believe the morning had passed away.

"I do like holidays so much," he exclaimed. "I wish, mamma, you'd let
me wait till next Monday before I begin my lessons."

Mamma shook her head. "Play as much as you please to-day," she answered
pleasantly. "After that, you can decide for yourself whether to linger
over your books for six hours or apply yourself vigorously for three."

"Hasn't he outgrown that habit of dawdling over his lessons?" asked
grandpa, looking at the boy with an arch smile that brought the blushes
to his cheek.

"He'll answer for himself to-morrow," replied the lady.

About four o'clock in the afternoon, Mrs. Seyton put on her bonnet
again, to go to Mr. Maynard's cottage, when Maurice ran in, his apron
full of eggs.

"Oh, grandma, see what I've found," he cried, "while I was feeding the
fowls. There was a cross old hen setting on 'em, and I had to take a
stick and whip her before she'd get off."

"Why, Maurice Seyton, you've spoiled a whole brood of chickens! They'd
have been out of the shell in two or three days. It's a terrible pity
you touched 'em."

[Illustration: Maurice feeding Grandma's Fowls.]

Grandpa then explained to him the danger of disturbing the mother hen
when she was hatching her young; and he was so much disappointed that
he began to cry.

"I never will drive off another hen," he said, winking back his tears.
"I do love little mites of chickens, dearly."

His mother gave him permission to accompany her again to see Kitty, and
waited while he washed his face and changed his sack.

Kitty lay perfectly quiet, now, her poor, deformed fingers outside the
white counterpane. Her transparent skin showed the blue veins in her
forehead, but the peace of God was manifest there also.

"Had I better go in?" whispered Mrs. Seyton to Hepsey at the door.

"Yes, she knows you've been here, and she'd be disappointed not to see
you; but she can't talk much."

Mrs. Seyton walked softly to the bed, followed by Maurice, and bending
over the pale sufferer, kissed her cheek.

It was delightful to see the bright flush of pleasure that for one
instant beautified Kitty's whole face, then she said feebly,—

"Thank you for coming. Is that your son?"

Maurice shyly gave his hand.

"I am sorry to see you so feeble and languid," began the lady.

"I am seldom so weak as to-day. I have had a comfortable winter on the
whole, and so many blessings." These words were uttered with great
emphasis, and with a smile.

"God is so merciful," the dear girl went on, "whenever I have worse
spasms than usual, he gives me patience to endure them."

"That I am sure of," was Mrs. Seyton's tearful reply.

"And then he raises up so many friends for me. Sometimes, in the night,
I lie and think of all he has done for me during the past nine years;
and I can hardly keep from singing: 'Praise the Lord, O my soul; and
forget not all his benefits.'"

[Illustration]



CHAPTER V.

VISIT TO KITTY.

MAURICE had stood during the whole interview, his eyes fastened on the
sick girl, fascinated by her sweet smile, and low-spoken words, and at
last, when she turned to him and asked,—

"Are you the kind boy who brought me a dinner of strawberries?"

He blushed with pleasure.

As nothing was said about the dressing-gown, Mrs. Seyton did not allude
to it, and, fearing to fatigue Kitty, soon rose to leave.

"I'm so glad you've come early this year," murmured the invalid. "It'll
be so nice to have you run in every day as you used to."

"She's been counting the days till July," added her sister, eagerly.
"She thought you'd be here by the Fourth."

"I'll come any time to read to you, if Hepsey will let me know when you
are able. It is a favor to me, Kitty, to be with you. We settled that
last year, you remember; and Maurice, I'm sure, will love to run of
errands for you."

The little fellow scarcely spoke all the way home. What do you suppose
he was thinking of? Why, he was wondering how much worse Kitty's pain
was than his toothache; and whether she ever had that, and how she
learned to bear all her sufferings so patiently. He wondered, too,
whether she had to study and do sums. As she lay in the bed she did not
look much taller than he, and mamma said she was not a woman but a girl.

"If she does have lessons," he said to himself, "I should like to know
whether she can spell better than I can and whether she is always
patient in learning them."

Mrs. Seyton noticed that Maurice was very thoughtful, and she hoped the
sight of Kitty might do him great good. She resolved to tell him the
poor girl's story that very night, as she was sure it would add to his
interest and sympathy in her sufferings.

His usual bed hour in the summer was eight; but on this day he had
played so hard he was quite ready to accompany his mamma when she
called him, soon after supper.

There was a large butternut tree close by the house, so near, indeed,
that the branches touched the windows. In a fork formed by two large
boughs, a pair of robins had built their nest; and they were just
warbling their good-night song to their little ones, when Mrs. Seyton
and Maurice approached the window.

For a few moments they stood and listened, and then the lady said,—

"I am going to tell you the story I promised."

"About poor Kitty, mamma?"

"Yes; when I was first married to your father, he brought me here to
see his parents. Your uncle George and aunt Lily lived at home then;
but now they have homes and families of their own, as your father has.
About an hour after we came, we walked to the top of the hill to see
the beautiful sunset, and on our way back, a bright, pretty child met
us, and timidly held out to me a bouquet of wild flowers. The act was
gracefully done, and I eagerly asked,—

"Are these pretty flowers for me?"

"The color crimsoned her cheeks as she answered softly,— 'Yes, ma'am.'"

"'A present to the bride, are they, Kitty?' asked your father, gaily.
'Now let me introduce you, Miss Catherine Maynard, this is my new wife.
I shall ask you presently how you like her looks. Mrs. Seyton, this is
Miss Maynard, one of my best friends.'"

"Kitty by this time had lost all her shyness, and laughed merrily."

"'He always is so funny,' she said to me, apologizing for her mirth."

"From this time, Kitty and I understood each other well. She was the
third and youngest daughter of Mrs. Maynard, but so different from
the others, it seemed scarcely possible that she belonged to them.
They felt the difference, too, and regarded her with pride as well as
affection.

"When we left F— for our own home, Mrs. Maynard promised to let Kitty
come and make us a visit during the winter, but she never came."

"Why not, mamma?"

[Illustration]



CHAPTER VI.

KITTY'S STORY.

THE lady sat for a few moments with her head resting on her hand,
looking so very sad that Maurice dared not interrupt her. She saw his
eager face at last, and went on in a hurried manner.

"Late in the fall, Mrs. Maynard's sister came from the West to make
them a visit. She had a young babe about ten months old, a lovely
child, to whom Kitty soon became warmly attached. The little girl was
named Nellie; and they called her playfully, Nellie Bly, like the
little song, you know."

"One evening there was to be a concert. The whole family were anxious
to go; but there was Nellie to be taken care of. At last Kitty urged
them to leave the baby with her. She was ten years old, and though
playful as a kitten herself, could be very matronly when she chose."

"'I'll take such nice care of her,' she urged, 'that she will want you
to go every evening. I promise you, Aunt Martha, that I wont leave her
a minute.'"

"This plan was agreed to at last. Little Nellie Bly was fast asleep
in the cradle. Kitty sat by her side knitting a sock for herself; the
doors were all fastened except the one from which were going out."

"'There can't possibly be any danger,' exclaimed Mrs. Maynard."

"As they shut the door, Kitty called after them with a laugh, 'If I
grow sleepy, I shall get my new book and read a little.'"

"That was the last they saw of Kitty in health. No one could explain
what happened; but it was probable that sitting alone for two hours or
more, the child grew sleepy, and a spark snapped out of the stove upon
her dress. She woke in a fright to find her clothes in a light blaze.
She screamed for help, and then tried to put out the fire by rolling on
the floor. In the midst of all her fright and pain, she remembered her
promise not to leave the baby a minute, and snatching it up from the
cradle, she ran half way down the hill to the next house, screaming,—"

"'Fire! Fire! Oh, do help me!'"

"Her parents met her here. Her mother took off her own warm shawl, and
folding it tightly about her poor child, quenched the flames. Then her
father took her tenderly in his arms, Martha following with the baby.
By the time they reached home, Kitty had fainted.

"There, on the floor, was a magazine, the leaves smouldering away. The
cradle-quilt was more than half burned, and still smoking; but, most
fortunately, the flames had not extended farther."

"Was Nellie Bly burned too, mamma?" asked Maurice.

"One arm and the side of her neck were sadly scorched. She got well
in a few weeks, but died four months later with croup. Kitty was
dreadfully burned, her hands especially. She has never since been able
to open her fingers. The first convulsion came on the night after the
sad accident, and she has never been wholly free from them since. That
was nearly nine years ago."

"For a long time the physicians hoped to be able to cure her. Mr.
Maynard gave up his trade, and stayed in the house to help take care of
his distressed child. Then they sold off, piece by piece, their parlor
furniture, using the money to pay the doctors' bills, until at last
they became quite poor. The neighbors were all kind, or they must have
suffered."

"Her father and mother were almost heart-broken when they were told
that Kitty's spasms were incurable. I suppose the poor girl herself
would tell you that she was very rebellious and wicked when she
gradually came to understand their opinion. To those around her she
always seemed thankful for every service, and remarkably patient in
enduring her pain."

"She used to cry out when she felt the spasms coming on,—"

"O God, do please help me! Do make me patient! Do, somebody, pray God
to make me better!"

"Did God help her, mamma?"

"Yes, he did. He helped her to become submissive to his holy will,—to
look beyond this world to her home in Heaven, where there is no sorrow
nor suffering; and where the tears are wiped from every eye. He helped
her, suffering and feeble as she is, to be the greatest blessing to the
whole family, and to many others beside."

"How could she be that, mamma, when she can't get out of bed?"

"I will tell you, Maurice, how she has been a blessing to me. When
I first knew her, I used sometimes to think I had great trials.
Little things often vexed me. I watched Kitty day by day, bearing her
sufferings without a murmur; happy through them all; thanking her
Heavenly Father for every moment that she was free from pain. Do you
think I could help trying to be patient under my trifling annoyances?"

"Does Kitty have the toothache?" asked Maurice.

"I don't know. Her agony is so much worse than toothache, I don't
suppose she would notice it much."

[Illustration]



CHAPTER VII.

MAURICE LEARNING PATIENCE.

THE visits of Maurice to the cottage were not always as sad as his
first one had been. He was there when Kitty lay swinging in her
hammock, and was delighted to be trusted to pull the rope softly, since
the gentle motion was all she could bear.

He saw her face flush with pleasure as she thanked his mamma for the
beautiful dressing-gown which her sister had found so mysteriously
hanging under an old coat in the closet, and knew no one but dear Mrs.
Seyton could have selected a print so exactly to her taste.

He saw her again, raised a little by pillows, her hands busy in forming
a thread-case from the bits of silk and leather sorted so neatly in a
basket before her.

He heard her as she sang in a low, sweet voice, her favorite hymn:—

   "Whene'er I take my walks abroad.
     How many poor I see!
    What shall I render to my God,
     For all his gifts to me?

   "Not more than others I deserve;
     Yet God hath given me more;
    For I have food while others starve,
     Or beg from door to door."

He heard her, too, when, with eyes partly closed and every nerve
quivering with pain, she repeated the sacred words:—

   "Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord
   draweth nigh."

   "Take my brethren, the prophets, who have spoken in the name of the
   Lord, for an example of suffering affliction and of patience. Behold,
   we count them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job,
   and have seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful and of
   tender mercy."

   "Let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and
   entire, wanting nothing."

Maurice, though a little boy, observed all this, and one evening his
mamma was delighted to hear an addition of this petition to his prayer:—

"Please, O God, when I have any lessons to learn, or any peas to shell
for grandma; or, when I have the toothache, make me patient like poor,
darling Kitty."

This prayer was from his heart.

He did not merely repeat the words, as too many children do, and thus
give to God what he despises, only lip-service. In answer, his Heavenly
Father did help him. Before they left the country for their own home,
all the family noticed that he was learning to practice this virtue.
Sometimes, indeed, his old peevishness and impatience would break out;
but he tried to check it; and the thought of Kitty lying in pain year
after year, without a murmur, helped him to do it.

Mr. Seyton had been in the habit, ever since the accident to his little
favorite, of giving twenty-five dollars a year toward her support. He
now with great cheerfulness, doubled this contribution to enable her to
have a skilful physician from the city to consult upon her case. The
effect of the new treatment was most favorable.

Even in the few weeks before they left F—, Mrs. Seyton could perceive
a change for the better; and by the time they came to the country the
next year, the improvement was very marked.

But before I go on to state what happened the next summer, I must tell
you how Mr. and Mrs. Seyton were paid for all they had done for poor
Kitty.

In the winter Maurice was taken sick; and the doctor said he had
scarlet-fever. He suffered greatly at times with his throat, and
afterwards with his eyes, being obliged to stay in a darkened room, but
he never once complained. Of course, he used to long to be well; and
both he and his parents earnestly prayed that he might be so; but he
never gave way to his old habit.

Once at midnight, when his father was giving him some medicine, he
said, tenderly,—

"My darling, patient boy!"

It was very painful for Maurice to speak; but he tried to articulate
the words,—

"Am I patient, papa? I'm trying to be. Kitty says, 'that's the way to
please Jesus.'"

He referred to it again in the morning, and asked his mamma to read the
verse about being patient in tribulation.

"Kitty told me what it meant," he said. "I'm in tribulation now, and I
pray to God to help me bear it, as he does her."

Mr. Seyton was so much delighted that he wrote Kitty a letter about
it, and told her he should consider four times the money he had given
her well-spent, since his little son had so greatly improved under her
example and influence.

Before this letter, Kitty and all her family had been very fond of
Maurice, and you may be sure they were not less so when they learned
what a patient child he had become.

[Illustration]



CHAPTER VIII.

JIMMY BARNARD'S SIN.

THE next summer, when Maurice, having been in F— only half an hour,
gaily ran over the hill to the cottage, with a present for Kitty under
his arm, he found her not lying prostrate as before, but sitting nearly
erect, her fingers busy with her ribbons.

There was a kind of frame attached to the bed, which her physician had
sent her from the hospital, and which raised her to any position she
wished. Her fingers were not straight, to be sure; but she was able to
use them without much pain, for which she was so thankful she could
scarcely speak of it without tears.

When Maurice, with rosy checks and sparkling eyes, unfolded his bundle
and laid before her half-a-dozen numbers of a popular magazine, and
showed her that each number contained patterns of various kinds of
fancy work, such as she could easily imitate, she gave a scream of joy.

"Just the very thing I want," she said, over and over again. "It
will be such pleasure to make something new, and lay aside these old
patterns, which people only buy to lay in their drawers out of sight."

"I sent money to the Editor," said Maurice, entering with all his heart
into her joy, "and every month, one number will come till the year is
through. There's nice reading in them about birds and beasts. Mamma
read some of it to me."

Mr. Seyton thought his son old enough this year to go to the public
school. There was, just over the hill, a little red school-house, the
very one in which he had learned his letters years ago, and now, he
introduced his son to the teacher, remarking, playfully,—

"My wife says I've turned out so well, she wants Maurice to commence
his education here where I did."

"I'll do my best for him," answered the teacher, in the same tone; "and
hope the boy may become as good a man as his father."

At first the little fellow did not enjoy the company of so many boys,
but, after a few days' acquaintance, grew to be delighted with the new
arrangements. When he came home, he would talk by the hour about the
lessons, and how near the head he was, and what fun they had playing
tag at recess, and how Bob Munger was going to make a kite that would
fly a mile right up into the sky, and how the boys were going to give
him all the string they could find.

Mrs. Seyton was very much surprised, therefore, when one Wednesday noon
he came home very sober and silent, and sat down to his dinner without
whistling, or without a word about the school. It was a half holiday,
and usually there would have been an earnest pleading for permission to
join his companions at their play on the common; but now he took a seat
on a cricket near his mamma, and asked her whether she had any thread
for him to wind.

"Don't you want to play?" she asked, gazing in his flushed face.

He cast down his eyes, blushing crimson.

"I don't feel like playing," he faltered, trying to control his voice.

Mrs. Seyton wondered what had happened, but did not like to press
him for the reason, as she was sure he would tell her by and by. She
smilingly placed a skein of bright-colored zephyr on his hands, winding
it loosely on her fingers. When it was done, he jumped up, asking,—

"Mamma, may I go and see Kitty?"

"Yes, dear, I like to have you there; she says you're a great help to
her."

With a good-bye kiss, he bounded away.

[Illustration]



CHAPTER IX.

CONCLUSION.

"I WANT to tell you something," he whispered to Kitty, "a secret, you
know."

"How nice," she answered, with her sweet smile. "Ma is busy in the
kitchen, and you can take care of me while the girls go out of an
errand."

"I used to like Jimmy Barnard first-rate," he began at once into the
subject as soon as they were alone, "but now I think he's awful mean. I
never shall like him any more."

"Why, Maurice!" exclaimed Kitty, in surprise.

"I'm going to tell you all about it," he said, eagerly. "The rule is
not to whisper, and teacher said yesterday that he must break the
habit, and he promised to ferrule the first boy he caught whispering.
Pretty soon I forgot, and asked Bob Munger for his knife to sharpen my
pencil. He's got a prime one with three blades. Teacher heard me and
made me go up to the desk, and tell him what I said. He ferruled me
a little, but I didn't cry for that, I cried because—because I never
was ferruled before. He punished Jimmy Barnard and ever so many of the
boys, too; but they didn't seem to care about it."

"This morning when teacher looked for his ferrule to rap on the desk
for prayers, he couldn't find it anywhere, and when he sat down on his
high seat, he jumped right up again; somebody had stuck some pins into
the cracks so that they would prick him. The boys and girls laughed;
but I thought it was awfully unkind when he's such a good teacher. The
tears came right into my eyes.

"What makes you look so fiery red?" whispered Jimmy Barnard; but I
wouldn't answer, because that would be breaking the rules, you know.

"Teacher asked whoever played him such a vile trick, to get up and
confess, and he'd forgive them; but nobody moved. The worst of all
is," added Maurice, with a burst of tears, "that Jimmy went up to the
teacher at recess, and told him he'd seen me around there before school
commenced and he guessed I did it; when I wouldn't do such a thing for
ever so much money."

"Of course not,—I knew you wouldn't," said Kitty, soothingly; "and what
did teacher say?"

"I know he thinks it's true, for he always speaks so kindly; and this
noon he wouldn't look at me. I ran all the way home; and I could hardly
keep from crying at dinner. Then I'd come and tell you about it. Oh, I
feel so bad!"

"Shall I advise you, Maurice?"

"Yes, please do."

"Say nothing about it, except to your mamma. Try to treat Jimmy as
kindly as you can. It will all come out right, if you will keep unkind
thoughts out of your heart."

"But I don't want to go to school when teacher thinks I'm such an ugly
boy."

"Perhaps it isn't pleasant; but I want you to go, and behave just as
well as you can. Your conscience tells you that you were not the guilty
boy, and your teacher will find it out very soon."

"But if Jimmy Barnard tells him more lies about me!—"

"Maurice," said Kitty, seriously, "I want you to reach me the Bible
from the stand. Now find the first of Peter, second chapter, and you
will see the twentieth verse tells you what to do."

The boy looked curious, and turning to the place read: "'If when ye do
well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with
God.'"

"Oh, Kitty," he exclaimed, his face all in a glow, "it seems as if
that verse was written on purpose for me. I mean to try and take it
patiently. I'm so very glad you found it for me."

There was a glad smile on the pale face, as it was turned to the boy,
who stood with his finger resting on the words he had read.

"Now," she said, "turn to Thessalonians and see what St. Paul tells us
about it."

"Is this the place, Kitty? 'Now we exhort you.'"

"Yes; that means, we 'beg or beseech you.'"

"'Be patient toward all men. See that none render evil for evil, but
ever follow that which is good.'"

Mrs. Seyton was not much surprised to see Maurice come bounding into
the yard, his face as smiling as ever. He had resolved to try and
banish all resentment toward his companion, all hard thoughts of his
teacher, and endeavor to please God by bearing patiently the reproach
cast upon him.

For two days he returned kindness for Jimmy's unkindness, and though
the teacher did not once pat him on the head, or say "good boy," he
went on doing his own duty, sure, as Kitty said, it would all come out
right if he would be patient.

The third day the teacher stopped the school at recess, and told Jimmy
Barnard to take his on the platform.

"I want you all," he said, addressing the scholars, "to see a boy who
was guilty of playing a foolish, disrespectful trick on his teacher,
and then, to hide his guilt, charged an innocent companion with the
fault. Last night, I was walking by the creek, partly concealed by the
trees, when I heard James Barnard boasting to a school-mate of having
hidden the ferrule and of sticking the pins into the seat. He spoke of
Maurice Seyton, too, and wondered he bore so patiently the reproach,
when he knew nothing of the crime. I have so bad an opinion of a boy
who would be so mean and wicked, that I do not wish my scholars to
associate with him; and I now expel him from the school. Maurice, as I
have said, is entirely innocent; and I here publicly ask his pardon for
having ever thought otherwise."

"There, Mamma!" exclaimed the boy, rushing into room. "It's all come
out just as you and Kitty said it would. I'm so glad I tried to be
patient. Do you think God is pleased with me now?"

"I know he is, my darling; and your mother is pleased, too."

[Illustration]








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PEARL OF PATIENCE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


