The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Kink
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Kink

Author: Thomson Burtis

Release date: May 4, 2024 [eBook #73536]

Language: English

Original publication: United States: The Butterick Publishing Company

Credits: Roger Frank and Sue Clark


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KINK ***


When an Airman Grows Too Old to Fly

THE KINK

By Thomson Burtis


Finley strode to the desk of the operations clerk in the flying office
and inquired with a sunny Irish smile--

“Well, what old hulk do I haul around the field for flying time today?”

The grizzled old sergeant’s eyes dropped, and he seemed to mumble his
words in embarrassment as he pawed for a slip.

“The Larkin, sir!”

“What?” exploded Finley. “That superannuated old wreck? What the ----,
sergeant, what the ----? For the last month I’ve been trying to get my
paws on a good ship and all I get are crates that should be in a
museum! ----, I’m sick of--”

“Oh, well, it isn’t your fault.”

A loud laugh resounded from the ceiling as young “Kink” Forell came out
of the locker-room, helmet and coveralls on, goggles swinging in his
hand, his parachute under his arm.

“Lieutenant James Finley, official scavenger of ships for McCook
Field!” he gibed, his boldly handsome face twisted into a mirthless
grin. “Gosh, you’ll save the survey officer more trouble before this
year is out, Finley, than any flyer in the army.”

He stopped at the door to get in the last words. Radiant vitality oozed
from every pore of the tall young flyer, and his greenish-gray eyes
were sparkling.

Hot words rose to Finley’s lips, which was unusual. If they did come
there was an undercurrent of humor in them, as there had been when he
had raved querulously at the sergeant. But Kink Forell could rub him
the wrong way every time.

However, his habitual repression saved him, and he said mildly--

“Beat it, King, and do your stuff instead of talking it.”

He went into the locker-room and got his flying clothes, coming out on
the outside platform with a determined grin on his square, snub-nosed
face. The freckles stood out prominently, as if he were slightly pale.

The foremost airplane laboratory in the world was spread before him as
he descended the stairs as if walking in his sleep. Drawn up in front
of the row of hangars was a collection of ships, some of which might
have been the fruit of a designer’s nightmare. Motors upside down,
monoplanes, triplanes, ships with both pontoons and wheels on them;
single seaters, two seaters, ships that could carry eight men; the
little Sperry, a gnat of the air with a tiny three cylinder motor, was
ranged alongside the mighty Barling bomber.

For once Finley’s mind did not indulge itself in a comparison of some
of those shining ships with the craft of his own early days in the air.
King Forell was taking off, he noticed, in one of the new pursuit jobs.

As the stalwart flyer walked up the line, seat-pack parachute under his
arm, he was searching for the ship he was to fly. There it was, its
dope cracked and discolored with age, looking the veteran it was. In
fact, a fit ship for a has-been to fly.

He forced his mind away from that subject. His eyes rested on the
Barling triplane. There was a ship! Weighing fourteen tons and capable
of carrying six tons more; six Liberty motors to fly it and a crew of
six men necessary to handle it properly, it was truly the leviathan of
the air. What it portended for the future of aviation was something
which the mind of a Finley could speculate upon forever.

“Jim! Jim Finley!”

It was the C.O.’s voice, and it cut through the drone of King Forell’s
twelve cylinder motor, now three thousand feet overhead. Finley turned
and saw the major standing with a group of men alongside some expensive
motor cars.

“Those Congressmen from Washington,” he remembered, and walked toward
them.

“This is Jim Finley, gentlemen,” the major said jovially, and went on
to introduce him.

“These gentlemen were discussing the first test flight of the Barling,
Jim,” he went on, “and I was telling them that you were the man who
hopped it off, just as you came along.

“At that time,” he pursued, turning to the interested Congressmen,
“Finley was chief test pilot of the Air Service. He flew the Barling
when it had never been off the ground before, and did a great job.”

One stout, jovial legislator shook his head smilingly.

“That must take a unique and extraordinary brand of nerve,” he stated.
“In fact, having your job must mean a continuous succession of--”

“We took him off a few months ago,” the major interrupted with a quick
look at Finley, “to give him a rest.”

“And a ---- of a rest, too,” Finley said with his slow grin. “Hauling
the oldest hulks on the field around.”

“A contrast to flying the newest, eh?” laughed one of the Washington
men. “Well, I congratulate you on being the first man to fly that--that
monster there. And doing it successfully.”

“No credit to me,” Finley explained. “I flew a lot before the war, was
an instructor a week after it broke out and shortly after that was sent
to the Caproni school in Italy. They’re three-motored babies, you know,
so big ships have been my dish.”

“Well, I guess Forell is about ready,” the major said, somewhat
awkwardly.

He seemed ill at ease, Finley noticed, when the past was mentioned.

“Glad to have met you all.”

Finley smiled, and started for his ship. Forell was evidently going to
give the visitors an exhibition. Well, no one could do a better job.

Despite himself, his mind roved back to that day when he had tested the
Barling, and particularly to the banquet which the manufacturers had
given that night in a Dayton hotel. The chief himself had been there,
and as toastmaster he had introduced--

“Undoubtedly the best big-ship pilot in America--Jim Finley!”

All in all, that had been the high point of his flying career, Finley
admitted, as his eyes caressed the great ship which lorded it over the
line.

Suddenly the roar above grew louder, and he stopped to watch. Three
lounging pilots looked upward, and the swarm of mechanics on the line
quit work entirely. When King Forell was flying there wasn’t a great
deal accomplished on McCook Field.

The little scout shot downward, motor wide open, in a terrific dive.
Two, three, four thousand feet it dropped like a bullet. As it swooped
out, barely five hundred feet above the ground, Forell fairly stood it
on its tail. It bored its way upward a full half mile in a few seconds.
At the very top of the climb it arched over, as if to loop, but as it
got upside down it turned slowly on its horizontal axis. It ended up on
an even keel, without jerkiness or hesitation, and instantly went into
another one of those breath-taking dives.

“Boy, what ships!” Finley was thinking, as he saw the single-seater
flashing earthward at a speed of more than three hundred miles an hour.

Duralumin construction, even to the aileron controls, all-metal prop,
capable of a hundred and seventy-five miles an hour on the level. What
King was doing would not have been possible two short years before.

For this time King scraped the ground as he came out of that
bullet-like dive, and again the ship was darting almost straight
upward. But this time it was turning in a two-turn-upward tailspin.

“There,” reflected Finley, “is the best acrobatic pilot I ever looked
at. By the same token, he’s a bird that’s so far from being wise to
himself that he’ll ruin his chances if he don’t look out. He could be a
great guy in the service, if he doesn’t spoil his own chances!”

He moved slowly toward his ship as the “Kink” went into a continuous
series of stunts. Barrel-rolls, half-rolls, loops, spins, falling
leaves, upside down spirals--the whole gamut of aerial maneuvers was
accomplished without loss of altitude or a second of rest between
stunts.

And young Forell, less than two years out of West Point, was more of a
flyer than showed up there right then, Finley admitted to himself.
There wasn’t a test pilot on the field who could come down after flying
a new job and analyze its performance as well as the Kink. Finley’s own
ability to recommend changes in big ships’ construction which would
improve them, was Forell’s on the scouts, and there was no reason why,
with further experience, he shouldn’t be a whiz on any old plane at
all. Every wire and strut and spar, every eighth of an inch of span or
chord, every degree of incidence or dihedral--all had their message for
the brilliant youngster, and his recommendations on new jobs had been
uniformly accurate. They were thinking, Finley had heard, of sending
him to Tech for a four year course in aero-dynamics and design. Well,
they couldn’t pick a better man.

“If only he wasn’t such a pup. Shame, too,” Finley thought to himself.

                 *       *       *       *       *

Forell’s exhibition was done as Finley reached his ship and started
strapping his parachute around the back of his thighs. As he snapped
the shoulder and crotch straps together at his waist, his placid blue
eyes swept the mechanic.

“If anybody’s got any insurance they want to collect, come on and take
a ride,” he said with a grin. “Draw a chute, and hop in.”

The men glanced at each other beneath bent heads.

“I got to fix up Sixty-nine right away, sir,” the chief said awkwardly,
and the crew men had excuses.

Finley nodded. He was not surprized. Nevertheless, the lines were a bit
deeper, from nostrils to mouth, and his mouth a little thinner, as he
climbed up on the trailing edge of the left wing, and worked himself
ahead to the pilot’s cockpit.

The Larkin was a two-motored bomber, one motor set on each lower wing,
just far enough from the pilot’s cockpit to allow the propellers to
rotate. As it was, the tips of the big six-foot sticks almost grazed
the cowling of the compartment, which jutted forth in front of the
wings. It was a four-ton ship, with a wingspread of more than eighty
feet. Two years before it had been king of its kind; now it was
obsolete.

Finley’s hand dropped to the two throttles alongside his seat, and in a
second the left-hand Liberty was turning up fifteen hundred as his eyes
swept the instruments. Then the-right hand motor went into full cry,
and his eyes read the tale of the needles before him.

He nodded to the crew men, and after they had pulled the wheelblocks he
turned the ship on a dime by giving the right motor full gun. The aged
Larkin swept around to the left and, as it faced the field, Finley cut
the throttle.

Kink Forell was about to land, but he was coming down toward the
northern edge of the field in a nose dive. Fifty feet above the trees
the scout swept upward, and on its back. As it came swooping out of the
loop its under-carriage seemed to graze the trees. It zoomed upward,
banking as it rose, until it hung in the sky with idling motor, left
wing pointed at the ground. It dropped almost straight downward in a
vertical side-slip, straightening just above the ground.

It skidded wildly from side to side as Forell fishtailed it, and landed
lightly on three points.

“Landing out of a loop,” thought Finley. “He’ll get bawled out for
that, but he won’t mind.”

He could see the Kink now as he came up to the group of distinguished
guests to receive congratulations. Tall and slim and smiling, the sun
glinting from his red hair, he’d laughingly deprecate the compliments
which he loved so well.

Finley taxied out, turned his ship and shoved both throttles ahead. He
leaned against the wheel, and got the nose down as the Larkin bumped
massively along the ground. As he eased it off the ground, however, it
suddenly became easy to fly-- the controls answered the mere hint of
pressure on the wheel.

Finley’s square face was set and his eyes abstracted, as he circled the
field for altitude. There was no doubt that most of the men on the
field suddenly lost their wild desire to take a flight when it was
Finley who invited them. Perhaps it was accidental, but--

Of course, he had had a streak of bad luck lately. Four wrecks, as a
matter of fact, in a little more than a month. It was just a run of
accidents, of course. On that forced landing the wheels had hit a log
and the ship turned over. Another time, one of those ---- reversible
pitch propellers had suddenly gone into its negative position ten feet
above the ground and snapped the nose down. The other crashes had been
right on the field--bad air currents. When a man got into a run of luck
of that kind he’d crash into an oasis with the whole Sahara desert to
land on.

Perhaps that was the reason for his flying assignments, too. Like this
Larkin, for instance. When the Larkin was a brand-new wonder he had
been chief test pilot. In fact, he had been responsible for setting
those motors on the wings themselves. They had been trussed up between
upper and lower wings then. Five miles an hour more speed and greater
ease of handling had been the results of that suggestion. That was the
sort of stuff Kink Forell could do. He’d be even better with more
experience.

Suddenly Finley’s mouth widened in a wintry grin. When he and this
Larkin had taken their first flight they had been kings, with a
thousand people watching admiringly. Now they were limping through the
sky--a couple of has-beens.

It was starting to darken a little. The sun was down, and it was time
to land. He eased the great ship down over the trees and leveled off
with both motors cut to idling. It was slowing, now. Time to pull back
on the wheel.

As he pulled the wheel back the ship settled. But, as it dropped, there
was no contact with the earth. Finley, suddenly tense, felt the
sickening rush downward. It was a full ten feet before the wheels found
the earth, and there was a crash as the huge plane staggered back into
the air. His hand found the throttles in a split second, and the
Libertys were roaring. The ship settled again, and he fought it off the
ground for a taut ten seconds. Gradually it picked up flying speed, and
then he dared to look back.

A crumpled wheel marked the spot where he had hit. Doubtlessly the rest
of the under-carriage was an ugly mess of splintered struts and a
crushed wheel.

There was wild excitement on the line as the Larkin thundered low
across the field. They were pointing, jumping up and down, pointing to
the under-carriages of other ships. The Larkin was vibrating so that
Finley himself was bounced from his seat, at times, against his loose
belt. The wreck of the under-carriage had weakened the basic
spar-structure of the entire ship.

“Do they think I’m a ---- fool?” Finley raged suddenly, and the
fingernails of his free hand dug into the flesh.

“Steady, now,” he advised himself, and throttled the wild uprising
within him.

There was but one thing to do. He couldn’t land four tons at fifty
miles an hour, without wheels. And the Larkin wasn’t worth saving,
anyhow.

It was so left-wing heavy now that it took all the strength in Finley’s
powerful shoulders to keep it on an level keel, and the vibration was
so terrific that he could see the wing tips oscillate. The
thousand-pound motors seemed to be striving to tear themselves loose,
and each landing and flying wire gave an illusion of being a dozen.

If only the old hulk would hang together for five minutes! That would
get him over the vast expanse of Wilbur Wright Field, seven miles
north. He circled houses and avoided traveled roads as he fought
desperately to keep his stricken ship in the air. It was weakening
fast. At any moment it was liable to tear itself apart. He must not let
it fall in a thickly settled section.

As he reached the edge of the vast airdrome, seven miles outside of
Dayton, it was impossible to keep the left wing up at all. The Larkin
was like a bird with a broken wing, falling sidewise.

He unstrapped his belt, holding to the wheel as he tried to keep the
nose up. Facing the rear of the ship, one hand on the wheel behind him,
he gathered himself.

To slip would be fatal now. Those two propellers were like buzz-saws
and should he be thrown into either of them he would be carved up as
butter by a knife.

One foot was on the seat. Directly ahead of him was the bomb
compartment, its top three feet below the upper wing, even with the
back of his seat. Eight long feet away was the observer’s cockpit, a
round hole in the wide fuselage.

Using one leg as propelling force, he loosed his grasp on the wheel and
hurled himself forward, sliding on his stomach across the bomb
compartment. Instantly the great bomber fell into a whirling spin. He
was being hurled off his perch as his hands found the cowling around
the cockpit, and he hung there desperately, dragging himself forward.

The spin was terrific now, due to the wingheaviness, and four tons were
screwing earthward in a hell of shrieking wires. He fought to one knee,
then got one foot on the fuselage.

Just as one hand found the ripcord ring he was hurled from his ship
like a drop of water flung from a speeding wheel. An uncontrollable,
strangled cry of fear escaped him as he found himself in space with a
pack which was supposed to open on his back.

He fell end over end as he forced himself to count a full, slow five.
His brain was numb, but the one idea which gripped him was that he must
avoid that ship.

He jerked the ripcord, and with a sob of relief felt the little pilot
chute snap out. The next second it had pulled the folds of glistening
silk from the bag, and his body was jerked double as the shoulder
springs rose.

His waist was sore as a boil as he swung in sickening arcs below the
chute. Sometimes he was even with it. As the pendulum-like rushes
through the air slackened, a great ball of fire burst from the ground.

The Larkin had made its last flight.

He was nearing the ground now, and it seemed to be coming up to meet
him with ever-increasing speed. Fifteen feet a second, that was the
speed of the drop, but now, less than a hundred feet high, it seemed
terrific. He was close to the hangars, too, but he’d hit the ground
before he was blown against them.

His hands grasped the shroudlines which ran from the harness to the
edges of the big silk umbrella, and he loosened his muscles. As he hit
the ground he pulled his body upward, and bent his knees like a man who
lands from a jump.

He snapped off his harness before the breeze could drag him, and had
the billowing silk in hand as Captain Adams puffed up to him.

“What happened?” gurgled the captain. “Or do you always come down that
way?”

Finley wet his lips with his tongue. Seemed as if he did always come
down that way, at that.

“Wiped the under-carriage off at McCook,” he drawled equably. “There’s
a ship landing to bring me home right now, I guess. Will you have the
boys clean up the fire?”

“Sure. Want a drink?”

He did, but he shook his head. Somehow he wanted to escape before the
other officers at Wilbur Wright gathered around to ask questions.

“That’s Dick Redding, I think, after me.”

He walked out to meet the McCook ship, and Redding, who had succeeded
Finley as chief test pilot, motioned to the rear cockpit. As Finley got
in, Redding threw a “Glad you got out all right!” over his shoulder,
and took off without delay.

                 *       *       *       *       *

As they walked side by side, back at McCook, from the line to the
flying office Finley could barely restrain himself from bursting into
wild self-condemnation. Why was wiry, weatherbeaten little Redding so
quiet? Finley wondered as he threw cheerful answers to the questions
which bombarded him from mechanics.

“Well,” Redding said finally, “The Larkin’s not much loss, at that. She
was due.”

“Uh-huh. But I ought to be given twenty kicks in the pants and the
booby prize! Thinking about everything else but flying! When that
pocket hit me I was in dreamland.”

They were going up the steps, and as they approached the door of the
office some one was talking as if he were laying down the law.

“--kill himself, I tell you! There’s something the matter with him!
Why, how in ---- could--”

Redding fairly threw himself in front of Finley, and pushed the door
open. Sudden silence fell over the four flyers who were lounging around
on the desks.

“Got out without a scratch, eh?” queried fat, blond “Brad” Sparks.
“Well, you can’t kick!”

Kink Forell’s loud laugh rang out.

“Let’s see, Finley, this makes you a German ace, doesn’t it? You’ve
brought down five American ships within a month.”

“That’s nothing,” Redding slid in. “I once--”

“---- if you haven’t got the world’s record for short landings!” The
vibrant youngster went on loudly. “When you land a ship, it doesn’t
roll a foot!”

Finley despised himself for the inclination he had to answer the cocky
Forell in blazing words. It was hard to control himself.

“Sort of hard on wheels, though, my method is,” he said slowly, a set
smile on his face.

“Prettiest landing I ever saw!” gibed Forell, hard mockery in his eyes.
“Perfect dive, great leveling off, tail skid down just as she was
losing speed--ten feet in the air! Boy! What a darb that one was! I
never--”

“Shut up, Kink!” snapped Redding. “Come on Jim, let’s get the report
out of the way and shoot it over!”

“Why don’t you issue muzzles along with helmets around here?” snapped
Forell, his eyes flashing his resentment at the curt command. “I
suppose I hurt the poor old boy’s feelings, eh? I’m sorry, papa, if I
caused any tears.”

“Are you going to talk all day, for ----’s sake?” exploded Redding.
“For the love of Mike get out of here until this report’s fixed up,
will you?”

“No. I’m not ready yet. Listen, Finley, though, on the level. You ought
to get out of this flying game. You get old young in this racket, and
you’ll kill yourself before you know it. I’ll bet the flight surgeon’d
find more things wrong with your eyes than--”

“Oh, ----,” breathed big Franklin wearily. He darted a look at Finley,
who was seated at the desk. “Say, Kink, I need a little advice, too.
Have you any suggestions to make as to how I can improve my
cross-country?”

“---- if you don’t need some, at that!” the youngster shot back
nastily. “You get lost enough. Well, so long. I’m going to town. Better
take my tip, papa, on the doc.”

He slammed the door after him. Brad Sparks’ round, good-natured face
wore a frown as he remarked--

“In just about six months the Kink’s going to know so much that he
won’t be worth a single, solitary ----!”

As Finley took up the pen, the labored conversation of the others
reached his brain without making sense, as the knowledge smote him that
they were trying to avoid hurting his feelings, and were sore at Kink
for that reason. He, Jim Finley, who’d been flying bamboo kites-before
they’d ever seen a plane, and was leading flights of bomb-laden
Capronis across the mountains when they thought a ninety horsepower
Jenny was the only airplane in the world! They didn’t kid him-- didn’t
kid him when the favorite trophy of McCook Field was an elaborate
bronze shield whereon were engraved, with great pomp and ceremony, the
names of the men who pulled really classic bones!

----, they were sorry for him!

He got very drunk that night with Frankie DeShields, a jovial airman
whose firm belief it was that any landing from which one emerged alive
was a good landing, and that there were no good flyers dead nor poor
ones alive.

Finley’s head was throbbing dully next morning as he went through
reports listlessly. It was ten o’clock when the telephone rang. He
stiffened as he recognized the voice which reached his ears.

“Jim? Major Carrol, Jim. How about dropping over right away for your
six hundred and nine?”

“Why, doc, I just had my semi-annual three months ago. It’s not due
until--”

“I know it, but we’re getting at ’em early this time to ease the rush.
Come right over, eh? Good.”

There was a curious constriction around his heart as he walked to the
hospital. He wondered whether the doctor thought he’d fallen for that
stuff about starting the regular physical examinations earlier? Why in
---- couldn’t anybody around the field come out in the open, and say
what they had to say, with no bones about it?

The spry, scrawny little medico kept up the bluff, though, and filled
out long questionnaires and put the big flyer through the revolving
chair and went over his scarred body from feet to ears. Finley,
outwardly placid, felt the growing tautness of every nerve within him.
Why bother with all this junk? Why not get to the most important item
at once, instead of stalking around?

“All O.K.!” the chipper little doctor said cheerily. His eyes were
glinting behind his sparkling glasses. “Now we’ll take a peek at the
eyes, and we’ll be through.”

In a moment Finley had the end of two twenty-foot strings in his hands,
attached to two small, movable uprights which ran on runners in a
lighted box on the wall. Straining his eyes to the utmost, he strove to
adjust those small sticks until they were side by side. The major,
silent and intent, made him do it three times, and then set him to
peering through special lenses and trying to adjust them until a line
of light cut the center of an electric bulb squarely. He peered through
a stereoscope, and picked out different shades of pink and red from a
collection of colored yarns. Finally, he was in front of the vision
chart.

His eyes watered with the effort he made to read the twenty-twenty
line, and there was perspiration on his forehead as he tried to pick
out letter after letter from that blurred mass. He was weak as a kitten
when he followed the major into the office.

The kindly medical man settled himself behind his desk.

“Jim, I’ve got to take you off flying.”

Finley’s tongue licked his parched lips as he stared at the major, like
a man paralyzed.

“Your vision is way below normal--possibly due to overstrain--and more
important still, your muscle balance is out of plumb. Your stereoscopic
vision is imperfect. It may be curable with rest, or it may be simply
the natural result of growing a little older. Anyhow, I must take you
off.”

“But, doc, can’t you get a waiver from Washington? Once before--”

“In that case, Jim, I couldn’t recommend it. You can fly as an
observer, of course.” Finley took the blow standing up.

“Sure. I won’t lose--any pay.”

He could scarcely comprehend the full meaning of what had happened as
he walked slowly to the mess-hall. He was numb, somehow, mind and body.
As the babble of voices from within reached him he gathered himself,
and forced himself to lounge in and nod smilingly to a couple of
visiting flyers. When he settled himself at the long table which the
test pilots gathered around, he saw the unspoken question in the eyes
of Redding, Sparks and the others.

“Well,” he drawled. “You boys seem to be eating with a corpse.”

“Huh?” barked Redding.

“Just saw the doc,” Finley went on, his eyes busy with his plate as he
shook three times as much salt on it as he wanted. “It seems that my
dandruff is gradually making me just a shell of my former self, and the
left tonsil, I believe, is about to explode. And my halitosis--why,
it’s a wonder I’m alive!”

“What happened?” demanded Brad Sparks, looking squarely into Finley’s
eyes.

“I’m taken off flying,” Finley said calmly.

“I told you so!”

It was Kink Forell, just taking his seat.

“So you took my tip, eh? I knew it was the thing to do. You’d of killed
yourself in another week. You get old young in this game!”

Finley’s brows knit. ---- the weakness which made him bridle at every
cocky word of Forell’s. The red-head had his goat. Just then his words
had been a crow of triumph, Finley thought, because he, Forell, had
called the turn.

“I wish to ---- you’d get old enough soon to keep your mouth shut once
in a while,” Fairbanks told him levelly, but the Kink did not resent
it. He was in high good humor.

“Conversation,” he said airily, “is the spice of a meal.”

Finley went through his office work mechanically that afternoon, and at
four o’clock he was through. He got up from his desk wearily, lighted a
cigaret and stared out of the window at the flying field. The Kink was
testing a new monoplane pursuit job. The trim, shining little plane was
cavorting madly through the sky, like a dragon-fly at play. It
frolicked among the silvery, cumulous clouds, and as it darted in and
out, hung on its back and dived furiously in joyous exuberance, Finley
suddenly sat down at his desk again. His eyes were still staring
unseeingly out of the window.

For a moment his mouth worked, then was still. He leaned on the desk.
At thirty-five he was a discard in the flying deck--an outcast from the
kingdom he had helped to build, part of which he had ruled.

“And now, gentlemen, I want to introduce undoubtedly the greatest
big-ship pilot in America.”

His head dropped to his folded arms. That afternoon was his Gethsemane,
and he got very drunk again that night.

                 *       *       *       *       *

As the weeks passed his tranquil exterior was not entirely assumed. It
wasn’t as bad as he had thought, and the ache within him became only a
dull one. Dick Redding took over the big-ship work after Brad Sparks
was killed, and Finley was always a passenger on test flights. His
judgment of performance, and analysis of it, was as accurate as ever,
which helped his self-esteem. It warded off the time when the ground
would be his exclusive habitat, and the work of the air would go
completely past him.

Nevertheless, the pride of the pilot, which passeth all understanding,
was strong within him, and there was no earthly eminence which could
replace what he had lost.

And Kink Forell never missed an opportunity to remind him of what he
had lost. The Kink was going wild. His callous kidding of Finley,
unrelieved by any undercurrent of humorous raillery, had crystallized
the growing weariness of the little group of flyers with Forell and all
his works. The brilliant youngster sensed the change in feeling toward
him, and something indomitable in him made him deliberately pursue the
course which had caused it.

He received no more casual compliments about a particularly skillful
bit of work, so he went wild trying to force them from the taciturn
airmen. His flying brought frequent gasps from even the old-timers, and
scarcely a day passed, toward the end of the month, when Forell’s
matchless airmanship was not a topic of conversation--when he was not
around.

Finley’s animosity toward him grew in strength. That the Kink was like
an annoying hornet, buzzing around him constantly in an endeavor to
sting him, was not important. Forell grew to blame Finley for his
ostracism, and never missed an opportunity to get in a dig. That didn’t
matter. A fat-headed young fool like Forell couldn’t affect Finley’s
peace of mind for a moment.

Rather, the older man’s dislike was the result of his utter contempt
for Forell’s blind insanity. There was a bird with a brilliant future,
he reflected a thousand times, who was throwing away his chances for an
ideal life, through sheer egotism. A born aerial engineer, a flying
genius, young, handsome, loving his work--why, the Kink could be one of
the biggest men in the service, and an asset to it.

But because he was a stubborn, unbearably conceited brat, a year or so
would see him dead, or an outcast, unless he mended his ways. Never had
he been so cocky and domineering, nor his tongue so nasty, as now, when
the dislike of his fellow-pilots was something tangible in the very
atmosphere.

But he was showing the strain, Finley observed when he met him one
Saturday morning in the adjutant’s office. The Kink’s lean face was
thinner, he was somewhat pale, and there was an unhealthy glitter in
his eyes as he said--

“What are you doing here?”

“Got to see the major at ten.”

“That’s funny as ----! So’ve I! What does he want with the two of us?”

“You go in together,” the adjutant informed them. “Shoot!”

The C.O. was standing behind his desk, a paper in his hands.

“Morning, gentlemen. Get ready to take off in a Briston as soon as you
can pack a bag,” he said crisply. “The reserve squadron down at
Nashville are dedicating a hangar they’ve built on some lot they’ve
leased for a flying field. They’re getting a couple of Jennies to get
in flying practise on. There’s a banquet tonight. Forell, you give ’em
a flying exhibition this afternoon. Finley, they want you for a speech
at the banquet tonight. Don’t go crazy, Forell--just give ’em a little
show.

“Better start right away. It’s a two hour and a half trip. You’ll be
put up down there. If you’re having a good time, you needn’t come back
until Monday morning.

“Good luck. That’s all.”

“Boy, this’ll be fun!” Forell chuckled jubilantly as they went out.
“Ever been in Nashville? They sure have good-looking Janes there, and
we’ll be cocks of the walk. You’re not too old to like the women, are
you?”

“How soon can you be ready?” demanded Finley. “I’ll be set in half an
hour.”

“Me too. Let’s hope you don’t crash as a speechmaker, anyhow! I do the
flying and you tell ’em how, eh?”

“See you in half an hour.”

They took off promptly in the trim observation plane. It was of
duralumin construction, and capable of any kind of acrobatic work. It
could do a hundred and fifty miles an hour on the level, and
represented the last word in a two-seated fighting plane.

Finley, like all pilots, was uncomfortable without his own hand at the
stick, but Forell was not called on to meet any emergencies as they
roared down the Big Miami to its junction with the Ohio, thence down
that majestically muddy stream to a point above Louisville where they
cut southwest across the Kentucky mountains until they hit the
Louisville-Nashville railroad. From there it was but a half-hour run
across the brooding, wooded hills to their destination.

                 *       *       *       *       *

There were fully five thousand people at the field, and shortly after
they had landed Forell went up for his exhibition.

With that swarm of spectators intent on his every move, the Kink was
inspired. Finley watched him send the Briston hurtling across the sky
in a breath-taking dive, upside down, and then bring the ship out of it
through a straight nose dive that drew shrieks from the women and awed
comments from the men. It darted upward on its tail, spinning a full
turn, and there was speed enough left under Forell’s handling to allow
him to arch it over on its back once more. For a moment it gathered
speed, upside down, and then did a complete roll which left it upside
down again. Another instant to gather speed, and he had flopped it over
on an even keel once more.

Finley, his eyes shining with admiration, told the reserve officers--

“There, boys, is about the best stunt pilot you’ll ever look at!”

Shortly afterward the two McCook men left the field in the cars of
their hosts. Finley was to stay with a young lawyer who was plainly
honored to have him as a guest, and by the time several fingers of
mountain dew, collected in the shine of the moon, had done its work, he
was having an excellent time.

The banquet, it appeared, was not restricted to the reserve squadron,
for there were fully five hundred people around the tables when Finley
got up to speak.

He was surprized at their absorbed attention. He did not realize that
the passion for the air which had absorbed him for eighteen years shone
through his slow, almost halting words, and made them live. He was
stunned at the solid applause when he sat down.

The toastmaster was on his feet.

“You know who you’ve been listening to,” he told the enthusiastic
crowd. “One of America’s greatest pilots. Here’s where the program is
supposed to end, and it’s getting late, but I think we all feel like
just a word or two from Lieutenant Forell.”

Kink leaped to his feet, his face flushed and his words tumbling over
themselves as the applause smote him.

“All I can say is that you’ve been listening to a man who can’t fly any
more, so what he says means something. He knows, and he--can’t do any
more to develop the game. That’s what lays ahead of all flyers--either
have to quit, worn out and through, or get killed. But who cares? It’s
the greatest game in the world!”

Finley’s face did not change. Forell had to dramatize himself, of
course.

They took off Monday morning at eight o’clock, but there were fully
five hundred people at the field to bid them good-by. Finley, his hand
itching for the stick, sat tensely while the Kink took off. Forell held
the ship close to the ground, and then zoomed it over the hangar. He
followed the curve of the roof around, the wheels almost touching it,
and dived briefly down the other side.

Finley relaxed. The grandstanding was over now, he hoped.

As the Briston droned swiftly across the rugged mountains Finley’s
flyer’s instinct literally forced him to sweep the ground ceaselessly
with his eyes. Most of the time he had a tiny clearing or a possible
field always in mind in case the motor started missing. That was tough
country down there.

He stiffened as there came a break in the even rhythm of the Liberty.
For a moment the motor spat and missed. Then, for a moment, it fired
steadily.

Finley was ready to sink back thankfully in the rear seat when the four
hundred and fifty horsepower engine coughed again. His eyes leaped to
the tachometer. Only nine hundred revolutions.

Forell did all he could. He jazzed the throttle, dived steeply, and
tried the spark at all positions. The motor was stumbling along, its
r.p.m. only seven hundred now.

Finley’s hand gripped Forell’s shoulder. He pointed down at the one
possible field, three thousand feet below. Forell nodded impatiently,
and turned to his work.

The field was an oblong, and very short on its longest side. Squarely
in the middle of it stood a single tree, which turned the possible
landing space into two strips, scarcely twenty-five yards wide. It was
on a steep slope, and at its lower edge another hill, heavily wooded,
started rising from the very rim of the field. As they spiraled down
over it, Finley saw that in order to land uphill, the ship would be
forced, willy-nilly, into a fairly steep glide down that other slope.

Forell was a master-flyer, but never-the-less it was agony for even the
self-controlled Finley to sit idly by and watch Forell fly. Perfection
in judgment and airmanship was necessary if they were to make that
field in safety. There was not so much as a cabin within five miles,
should they be hurt.

Kink started banking for the field halfway up the slope which faced it.
As the nose swung toward the clearing the pilot stopped the spiral when
the radiator was pointed toward the field at an angle.

While the tense Finley wondered, momentarily, what he was going to do,
Forell sent the Briston into a gradual side-slip. It dropped down the
mountainside with scarcely thirty miles an hour of forward speed, and
he did not swing the nose for the right hand strip until the ship was
at the very end of the towering trees which formed the barrier.

He dropped it over them, fishtailed it with the rudder, and set it down
squarely in the middle of the landing lane. It trundled past the tree
with scarcely ten feet of clearance on each wing, and came to rest
twenty yards from the woods at the upper end.

The landing had been perfection itself.

“Sounded like water in the jets!” yelled Kink as he snapped off the
switches.

Finley nodded as he hit the ground. That had been his diagnosis of the
trouble, exactly.

He measured the field briefly with his eyes, and got the tool-kit out
as Forell climbed out.

“We’ll take a look,” Finley drawled. “Let’s hope it’s just a jet.”

“----, there’s no hurry,” announced Forell, lighting a cigaret. “We’ll
either have to get those trees--some of ’em--cut down, or else tear the
ship down and send it home. We can’t get out.”

“Can’t get out?” repeated the bewildered Finley, jet wrench in hand.
“Why--”

“Of course not!” snapped Forell, his eyes blazing suddenly. “There
isn’t a chance--”

“Well, let’s look at the jets, anyway,” Finley cut in calmly, and went
to work on the carbureter.

Forell paced up and down nervously as Finley worked without saying a
word. Occasionally the big red-head darted a puzzled look at his
stalwart, silent companion. Neither had anything to say until Finley
had the jets out and was peering through the tiny openings.

“There she is!” he said triumphantly. “Look!”

The water bubble in the high speed jet was plain to be seen. Forell
took a quick look through it. As Finley blew it out the Kink said
jerkily:

“As soon as we get her back we’ll make for that town over north and see
about getting some men to cut down some trees. We might be able to
leave by tomorrow.”

His eyes blazed a challenge to Finley, but the older man said
placidly--

“Let’s see whether she works first, anyhow.”

His mind was busy, however, with the implications in the Kink’s words.
With eighteen years of experience behind him, he came close to knowing
what could and what could not be done on a take-off. This one would
have to be perfectly flown, but it could be done.

“Get in, and I’ll swing the prop,” he directed.

“Oh, what the ----’s the use?” Kink started, and then stopped.

He climbed in the front cockpit, his face sullen and his blue eyes
glinting. Finley picked up two sizable rocks for wheelblocks, and then
swung the propeller as Forell handled switches and throttle. The
Liberty, still warm, caught at once, and idled along sweetly.

Forell turned it up a little, and tried it on either switch. He put it
through its paces, with the spark in all positions, and it seemed to
Finley that he was disappointed because it fired without a miss.

Suddenly the motor died, and Forell was on the ground.

“Well, let’s get started for help!” he barked. “I’ll go and you guard
the ship.”

“Go for help, nothing,” Finley told him, putting the tool-kit away.
“We’re going to take off!”

“Are you crazy!” yelled Forell, his face pale and drawn. “Why, ----,
there isn’t a Chinaman’s chance of getting out of here!”

“The ---- there isn’t,” Finley said levelly, his eyes not two feet from
Forell’s. “Listen. We get the ship up in the upper right hand corner
here, swing her around, and block the wheels. Give her the gun, and
right after she’s hopped the blocks she’ll be under full steam. Go
diagonally for the left hand side of the tree, and right there swing
her with right rudder to the lower right hand corner. That’ll give us
several extra yards.”

“----! You must be going blind! Why listen, you superannuated old fool,
we’d crash into those trees just as sure as we’re standing here!”

“We would not,” Finley said slowly.

“I say we would. And I’m the pilot of this ship; I’ve got the say, and
I won’t take her off!”

He seemed to be half-crouched, as if prepared to fight for his very
life.

“Oh, you won’t!” Finley said with deadly calmness. His eyes flickered
over the youngster before him with cold contempt.

“No, I won’t, and by ---- I think you’re going totally crazy! Want to
add another wreck to your--”

“Listen, you puling brat!” blazed Finley, and now all the repression of
months seemed to have been released, and with blazing eyes and a
torrent of speech he fairly threw his words into the younger man’s
face.

“You won’t take off, eh? A ---- of a flyer you are! Got all the nerve
in the world when the motor’s going good and you’ve got a crowd
watching you, haven’t you? But when it comes to getting in there, out
here in the wilderness, and giving her the gun when you’ve only got an
even chance, you haven’t got the guts!”

“Shut up, or I’ll--”

“You’ll do what?”

Finley spat his words at him. His powerful body seemed to grow and
expand until it overshadowed the slim youngster. There was contempt and
hate in his eyes as his tongue played around the alternately shrinking
and then wildly furious Forell, like a whip. He flayed the man he
despised, mercilessly, laying bare the diseased spots within the
outward semblance of the red-headed flyer.

Forell’s fists were clenched, and his eyes had the light of madness in
them as Finley welded iron into his soul by the heat of his wrath. Time
after time, during that stream of deadly insults which poured from the
transfigured Finley’s mouth, it seemed that Forell was going to leap on
him. Finley, giving not a step nor shifting his eyes by so much as an
inch, dared him to come on.

“And as true as ----!” he finished, “if you funk this take-off I’ll
climb in there myself and take her off, and I’ll bring her back to
McCook, and I’ll label you in front of the whole cock-eyed world for
the yellow-bellied, chicken-hearted, gutless ---- that you are!”

For a moment he played with the idea. He pictured himself coming in,
having made the take-off that Kink Forell couldn’t make. That would
show them whether he was through or not.

He put temptation from him. He was dimly aware that he had played his
trump card, as far as Forell was concerned. He hammered on along the
same line--insulting, threatening, daring the snarling, hot-eyed pilot
before him with a tongue tipped in vitriol and eyes that glowed their
hate.

Suddenly Forell drew himself up tensely, and there were tears in his
eyes as he shouted hysterically--

“All right, ---- you, we’ll go to ---- together just to prove that you
can’t bluff me!”

He was trembling as he got into the front cockpit, and started the
motor. Finley walked at the left wingtip as the ship taxied to the
upper right-hand corner of the field, and there he helped swing it
around. The rocks under the wheels, he got in. He was tight-lipped and
grim-faced as he settled himself for his worst ordeal in eighteen years
of flying.

What kind of a pilot would that quivering, hysterical youngster in the
front seat be when he was flying for his life? The Kink was sure he was
going to his death.

The Liberty roared into life, the throttle all the way ahead. The taut
Finley felt the stick jam forward. An instant before the tires jumped
the rocks the tail was in the air. Nose low to the ground, the Briston
sped for the left hand opening between tree and forest.

Finley’s hand was on the stick, his feet on the rudder, lightly. The
right wingtip scraped past the tree with scarcely two feet to spare. At
that instant the right rudder went on, and the ship angled for the
corner of the field. It was headed for the lower right-hand angle of
the field, now, where towering trees were like sentinels, alert to
repel it.

The time had long passed when there was any chance of turning back. It
was all or nothing, now. The ship was off the ground, rushing for those
trees, barely five feet above the ground. It was nosed down slightly,
gathering speed. Now the trees were dancing right in front of his eyes.

There Forell pulled back. The Briston shot upward, losing speed
rapidly. It barely cleared the topmost branches as he leveled it off.
It mushed downward, and there came a drag on the under-carriage.

Suddenly Forell was leaning forward as if to help his ship onward. With
all his natural genius for estimating flying speed and the capabilities
of a plane he fought it--fought to keep it in the air. In his
desperation it seemed to the older man, straining forward against his
belt, that the Kink worked up speed and tore the ship from those
clinging branches by his own strength.

It was free. For a moment, banking ever so slightly, Forell held it
level to gather speed. Then, the Liberty roaring triumphantly, the
Briston winged its way upward like some suddenly liberated bird.

Finley relaxed limply. Somehow he was very weary. He was glad
everything was all right, and that one of the most brilliant young
pilots in the service had got over the hump.

As they spiraled down above McCook he noticed that just about everybody
on the line was looking at them. Forell, who hadn’t turned his head
once, did not seem to notice the attention they were attracting. As the
ship taxied to the line a considerable group of mechanics and flyers
gathered to meet it, which was unusual, to say the least.

Forell did not run out his motor, but snapped the switches off without
delay. He was on the ground almost as quickly as Finley himself.

“Where did you pick the shrubbery?” demanded Dick Redding, pointing at
the wheels.

Finley’s eyes took in the sight. The wire wheels were stuffed with
foliage from the branches that had escaped.

“Where did we get it?” repeated Forell loudly. “On a forced landing,
that’s where!

“We came down in a little tiny field no bigger than a hangar, in
Kentucky. When we fixed her up I took a look. Didn’t seem a chance to
get out--not a chance. But I figured that we might do it by blocking
the wheels and some other stuff, so I said, ‘What the ----? Either we
do or we don’t!’ So I give her the gun, get the tail up, do a
snake-dance down this little pasture lot with trees all around it.”

His flashing eyes met Finley’s tranquil gaze, and he stopped talking as
if a hand had been clapped over his mouth. There was fear in his eyes
as Finley’s held them.

“Yeah,” Finley drawled placidly. “It was a tough spot, but the Kink
made it. Who’s got a cigaret?”


[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the August 15, 1927 issue
of Adventure magazine.]






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KINK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


