The Project Gutenberg eBook of The chest of tools
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The chest of tools

Author: Madeline Leslie

Release date: July 15, 2024 [eBook #74051]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: Henry A. Sumner & Company


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHEST OF TOOLS ***

Transcriber's note: Unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.

[Illustration: AUNT HATTIE'S LIBRARY]



                                  THE

                            CHEST OF TOOLS.


                                  BY

                              AUNT HATTIE

                          _[MADELINE LESLIE]_

                AUTHOR OF THE "BROOKSIDE SERIES," ETC.


                               —————————


   _"The lip of truth shall be established forever, but a lying tongue_
                   _is but for a moment."—SOLOMON._


                               —————————



                                CHICAGO:
                       HENRY A. SUMNER & COMPANY.
                                 1880.



      Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1867, by

                           REV. A. R. BAKER,

    In the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the District of
                            Massachusetts.



                        AUNT HATTIE'S LIBRARY
                       for her Little Friends.

                           [Illustration]

                             SERIES II.

  VOL. I. THE APPLE BOYS.

  VOL. II. LITTLE MISS FRET.

  VOL. III. THE FACTORY BOY.

  VOL. IV. FRANKIE'S DOG TONY.

  VOL. V. THE GOLDEN RULE.

  VOL. VI. LYING JIM.





                                   To

           NELLIE, ROLAND COTTON, ANNIE, AND FULLER APPLETON,

                    CHILDREN OF MY BELOVED NEPHEW,

                  THE REV. JOHN COTTON SMITH, D.D.,

           THESE SMALL VOLUMES ARE AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED,

                        WITH THE EARNEST PRAYER

        THAT THEIR LIVES MAY PROVE THEM TO BE LAMBS IN THE FOLD

                         OF THE GREAT AND GOOD

                         _Shepherd of Israel._



                               CONTENTS.

                            [Illustration]

  CHAPTER I. THE CUT FINGERS

  CHAPTER II. HENRY'S LIE

  CHAPTER III. THE LIE FOUND OUT

  CHAPTER IV. ANOTHER LIE

  CHAPTER V. THE BROKEN KNIFE

  CHAPTER VI. SEARCH FOR THE LIAR

  CHAPTER VII. THE UNHAPPY LIAR

  CHAPTER VIII. THE LIAR REFORMED

  CHAPTER IX. CONCLUSION



                          THE CHEST OF TOOLS.

                            [Illustration]

CHAPTER I.

THE CUT FINGERS.

MR. DRAKE was at work upon his carpenter's bench when he heard an angry
scream; and then a shriek of distress from two boys, who were at play
in the lower part of the shop.

One of the boys was his son Henry, the other, his nephew Ernest Monroe.
He waited a moment to see whether the cry would be continued, when he
was startled by hearing Henry exclaim,—

"O father! Come, come quick! Ernest has cut himself dreadfully."

The children were standing before an open tool chest, which Mr. Drake
had often forbidden them to meddle with. In the midst of his fright,
his anger was excited that they had dared to disobey him, and he called
out, in a harsh voice,—

"Boys, how came my tool chest open? Which of you presumed to unlock it?"

Henry and Ernest were both silent. Henry dared not confess the truth,
and his cousin, even if he had wished to tell tales, was at that moment
too faint to speak. Indeed, just before his uncle reached him, he fell
prostrate among the shavings that covered the floor.

"Why! Why! What does this mean?" exclaimed the carpenter, now seriously
alarmed.

Then seeing the pool of blood, which had streamed from Ernest's poor,
cut fingers, he caught up the child, and stepping over a low wall which
separated his own from his sister's grounds, soon laid him pale and
unconscious on his own bed.

"We must have the doctor here as soon as we can get him," he said, in
an excited tone, "or Ernest's hand will be useless. Henry, what are you
gaping round here for? Why, you ought to be half way to the doctor's!"

Mrs. Monroe trembled from head to foot; but, rallying very soon, she
proceeded to make an examination of the wound. Though covered with
blood, it was easy to see that three fingers of the right hand were cut
to the bone; besides a bad gash in the palm.

She washed off the blood as well as she could, and then held the
fingers in place, keeping them warm within her own, till the physician
arrived.

The cut was so deep, the doctor found it necessary to take a few
stitches in each finger, and then, having bandaged them, he gave the
boy a soothing powder, and left, promising to call the next day.

All this time his uncle sat by, his face growing hard and stern. As
soon as he perceived that Ernest could speak, he began,—

"Now I want to know how this happened. Who has dared to unlock my tool
chest against my positive orders?"

"Stop, brother," said Mrs. Monroe, firmly, at the same time interposing
herself between the carpenter and his nephew. "Ernest is too weak now
to talk. When he is better, I will ask him all about it."

"But, Jane, it's a pretty business if I can't lock up my tool chest
without the risk of having a lot of careless boys meddling with my
things. There's my new adze I saw lying on the floor and covered with
blood. I dare say it's spoiled, and—"

"John, you heard the doctor say Ernest must be quiet. If you will talk,
come in here."

The boy heard a few loud, angry words from his uncle, and then the door
was shut.

"Try to go to sleep," said his mother, bending over him and softly
kissing his cheek.

"Yes, ma'am," faltered the boy; "but I do wish Henry would tell his
father the truth."

"Would it make you feel easier, to tell me about it, now?"

Ernest sighed. "I did naughty, mother; but I didn't unlock Uncle John's
tool chest. I began to play with the tools, though. The new adze was
as sharp as a razor, Henry said; and so we tried cutting a hair with
it. Henry did it twice, and then it was my turn; but he liked the fun,
and wouldn't let me have it; so I tried to snatch it away, and I cut my
fingers."

"I'm very sorry, indeed, my dear boy. But did Henry unlock the chest?"

"That was another naughty thing, I did, mother; I promised not to tell
anybody. You know I tell you most everything; but this time I forgot."

"Well, Ernest, it is a sad affair; but we wont talk any more about it
this morning. You'll feel stronger after you've had a nap."

She drew down the curtain at the foot of his bed, and, leaving the door
ajar, went back to her morning work. Twice she crept to the bedroom,
and peeped through the crack, and at last, finding him to be asleep,
shut the door and left him.



CHAPTER II.

HENRY'S LIE.

IT was nearly noon when she heard a sound of voices in the bedroom. She
wondered who could have gone there without her knowledge, and stopped
outside the door to listen.

The visitor was Henry, and he was saying angrily,—

"No, you sha'n't. You promised certain true, black and blue, you
wouldn't tell anybody. If Aunt Jane knows it, she'll tell father; and
he'll half kill me. He's awful angry now."

"But, Henry," urged Ernest half crying, "he'll think I stole the key
out of his pocket; and I didn't. It's too bad, if I have to have my
fingers cut, and bear all the blame, too, when you did it. My cut
smarts awfully."

Mrs. Monroe now made a noise to let them know she was near, and then
opened the door, just in season to see Henry raise the window, and jump
out.

"Ah!" said the lady to herself. "That's the way he came in without my
seeing him."

"Have you been awake long, Ernest?" asked his mother.

"Henry waked me, getting in through the window. I wish he'd stayed
away. He's made my head ache so."

"I've made you some milk porridge, dear; I'll bring you a cupful; and
then perhaps you'll fall asleep again. I'll lock the window this time."

Ernest drank his favorite porridge; but he could not sleep. Henry's
words were constantly recurring to his mind. "If you tell, father 'll
half kill me. He's awful angry now."

Ernest was a timid boy, not tough and hearty, like his cousin, but
feeble from his infancy; "only raised to the age of eleven years," as
the doctor said, "by the unwearied nursing of a good mother."

Ernest had a great dread of his uncle's rough word's and hot temper,
very different from the manners of his own parents. One time and
another, from being a constant companion of his cousin, he had
experienced a good deal of harsh treatment from the carpenter. Now he
lay, tossing and turning his head on the pillow, thinking of Henry's
words, wondering whether he could be induced to confess, and dreading
his uncle's wrath.

At noon, when his father, who was a clock-maker, came home to his
dinner, after hearing the story from his wife, he found his son's face
burning with fever.

"O pa!" exclaimed the boy. "I'm so glad you've come. Is it ever right
to break a promise?"

"That depends, my boy, on what kind of a promise it is. Suppose I, to
escape an assassin, should promise a wicked man that I would help him
murder his neighbor; ought I therefore to keep the promise?"

Ernest shook his head thoughtfully.

"Then, again," added Mr. Monroe, "if a boy were placed so that he were
obliged to promise to do what he did not approve, to save his life, for
instance, I think such a promise ought not to be binding."

"But suppose, pa, that a boy forgot, and promised he wouldn't tell
something, when he had promised before that he would tell his mother
everything he did; what would God want him to do?"

"You needn't worry yourself about that, Ernest," said his mother,
coming into the room. "I know all you want to tell me; I know that
Henry stole from his father's pocket the key of the tool chest and
opened it."

"Did Henry tell you! Oh, I'm so glad!"

"I can't say how I learned it; but you may rest about your uncle's
displeasure."

Ernest burst out crying.

"I was afraid Henry 'd make him think I did it; and he'd whip me, I
know he would. He don't know what he's doing when he gets angry."

"If he dares to lay a finger on you," exclaimed the father, rising,
"I'll have the law on him."

"Hush," said Mrs. Monroe, soothingly; "there is no danger; your fever
has excited you, Ernest, and you must have some drops. How should you
like to have me bring my work, and sit here this afternoon? Or perhaps
I'll tell you a story."

"I'd like it first-rate."

"Well, I'll hurry and get through with my work. Do you want a piece of
custard pie?"

"I don't want to eat anything, my head aches so."



CHAPTER III.

THE LIE FOUND OUT.

"THE moment I can leave work, I'll go to the shop, and have a talk with
John," said Mr. Monroe, after they had for some time been seated at the
table.

"No, I wouldn't," mildly said his wife. "I'm going to have a talk with
Henry. It would be a great deal better to get him to confess."

"Henry is growing to be a bad boy. I wish they didn't live so near.
Sometimes I think we shall have to sell our place. I don't want Ernest
to associate with such a boy. Then everything that's lost or out of
place is laid to our child, whether he ever saw it or not. I'm sick of
living so."

"We cannot move away from trials, let us go where we will," was the
pleasant reply. "Generally John is a good neighbor, and his wife I love
dearly. Besides, Henry is unfortunate in being so afraid of his father,
and would be worse than he is, if it wasn't for Ernest."

By this time, Mr. Monroe had finished his second piece of custard pie,
and rose from the table with a smile, saying,—

"Well, Jane, have it your own way. You're generally right. 'Blessed are
the peace-makers,' the Saviour says; and I'm sure you've made peace
between John and me a score of times."

In the afternoon, when the mother was ready to sit by Ernest, he had
fallen asleep again. His face was very pale, and, as she bent over him,
her heart went up to God in prayer, that, if it was God's will that he
should be weak in body, his head might be strong to resist evil; that
he might be gathered into the fold of the good Shepherd.

Then she sat down close to the window, and presently she saw her
brother's wife, stepping over the wall, on her way to the house. She
went out to the sitting-room, softly closing the door behind her.

"I'm really sorry about Ernest," Mary Anne exclaimed, falling into the
rocking chair, with a sigh. "Does Doctor Frost think he can save the
hand?"

"Oh, yes, he hopes to! The only danger is that the muscles, which were
cut quite off, will contract. I am hopeful, for I cut my finger once
when a child, and for months had no use of it. But constant trying
brought it round at last. See, it's as useful a finger as I have now."
And she held up her forefinger for notice.

"What does he say about it?"

"He says he did not unlock the chest."

"That's true, Jane; I know he didn't."

The mother looked pleased.

"Oh, dear!" sighed Mary Anne. "If John wasn't so hot, I could set
it all right, but,—well it's no use to cry-about what never will be
different. I was making the beds when I heard Henry creep upstairs to
the closet where his father hangs his clothes. I was going to ask him
what he wanted when he said,—

"'Goody, here 'tis now!'

"He went down, and I heard the jingle of keys."

Mrs. Monroe then repeated the conversation, she had overheard between
the boys, and added, "I do wish Henry would tell his father."

"Yes, he ought, but I don't believe he'll dare to. He has told ever so
many lies already; for, when his father asked him, he said he was going
along by the chest and he saw it open.

"'How came Ernest by my new adze?' John asked.

"I don't know, sir. I saw him with it, and told him to put it down; he
wouldn't, and so I tried to make him. That's how he got cut.'

"It's dreadful for Henry to tell such falsehoods," said his aunt,
shaking her head. "I'd much rather have Ernest cut his fingers, than to
act so wickedly."

"I don't mean it as an excuse, of course," urged his mother; "but if
John were like your husband, 'twould be easier for Henry to tell the
truth."

"Mother, mother!" called out the sick boy.

Mrs. Monroe led the way to the bedroom, where she was followed by her
sister-in-law.

"Where's Henry, Aunt Mary Anne? I want to see him," eagerly exclaimed
Ernest.

"He's at work clearing the shop floor of shavings. His father has set
him to do it."

"When he's done, please ask him to come here."

"Yes, I will."

"There is nothing that hardens the heart so much as lying," said Mrs.
Monroe, "one lie leads on to another, until there is no knowing where
it will end. I remember my mother used to say, 'There is no safety
except in perfect truthfulness.'"

"Don't you believe I have told the truth, mother?" said Ernest, looking
up at her inquiringly, as he spoke.

"Yes, Ernest, I do; and so does your aunt."

"I have never caught Ernest in a lie," said Mrs. Drake, sighing again.
"If I had, I never should trust you again."

"It's hard sometimes to tell the truth right off," began the boy; "but
it is a great deal harder to wait."



CHAPTER IV.

ANOTHER LIE.

"WE'VE been in to Mrs. Monroe's to see Ernest," said Mrs. Drake, when
she was seated at the supper-table. "He looks as if he had lost a good
deal of blood."

"Well, the young rascal deserves to suffer; it may save him from the
gallows."

Henry shuddered, but did not speak.

"What do you mean?" inquired his wife.

"Mean!" he repeated the words in an angry tone. "Why, if it has come
to this, that my pockets are picked, my trunks unlocked, and my
tools ruined by a scamp of a boy, it's time something was done about
it,—that's all! If I caught my boy in such tricks, I'd whip him within
an inch of his life."

Henry's eyes were fastened, on his plate. If he had ever had an idea
of confessing that he, instead of his cousin, was the guilty boy, it
vanished at once.

When he had finished his supper, his mother told him that Ernest wished
to see him. When he had left the room, she said,—

"I do wish, John, you wouldn't talk so strong. Don't you see that if
Henry were to disobey you, he wouldn't dare to tell you of it. It seems
to me, parents ought to show their children that if they are really
penitent, they will be forgiven."

"I don't know what you're driving at, wife; but if it's anything about
the tools, you may stop hinting. Just as soon as Ernest is out of bed.
I'll haul him over the coals as sure as my name is John Drake. I never
forgive, as you have learned long ago."

"Don't you remember the verse, that Maria repeated at the concert,
which the minister explained so beautifully? 'If ye forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if ye
forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father in heaven
forgive your trespasses.'"

Knocking the ashes out of his pipe, Mr. Drake went out without
answering.

His wife, with a heavy heart, began to collect the plates, when Henry
burst into the room.

His cheeks burned like fire, and he was evidently excited; but as he
volunteered no explanation, his mother, after a glance at him, went on
with her work.

The truth is that both his Aunt Jane and Ernest had been urging him
to tell his father what he had done. At first, he tried to hide his
confusion by more lies, repeating the story he had told his father
about finding the chest open. But Ernest exclaimed with such evident
horror,—"O Henry! You told me you found the key in his pants' pocket,"
that he found it was no use to go on.

"If you don't tell, I'm afraid I must," said his aunt, firmly. "Ernest
shall not suffer from your fault. It was very wrong of him to touch
the tools when he knew that his uncle had forbidden it. If the adze is
injured, he must take his spending money, and buy a new one. I'm afraid
Henry, you don't realize what a wicked thing it is to tell a lie."

"I'm sorry I ever touched the old chest," exclaimed Henry, in a
passionate tone. "I wouldn't if Ernest hadn't teased me to. I never
should have thought of hunting up the key if he hadn't put it into my
head."

"Stop, Henry; you are only adding sin to sin. The Bible says: 'All
liars shall have their portion in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone.' If you are afraid to confess on account of your father's
anger, why do you not fear the wrath of God, who knows every thought of
your heart?"

Henry went to bed that night feeling that, turn which way he would, he
was in trouble.

"If I tell father," he said to himself, "he'll half kill me; and if I
don't, he'll find it out by Aunt Jane; and there 'll be a dreadful row."

The good Spirit whispered to him,—

"You have sinned. Confess your fault, and accept the punishment you
deserve. Your heart will then be at rest."

But Henry would not listen to the good Spirit. He said to himself,—

"If I stick to my lie, he'll believe me sooner than he will Ernest;
'cause when he once gets an idea in his head, he wont give it up nohow.
He thinks Ernest did it, and I—guess—I'll—let—him—think—so."



CHAPTER V.

THE BROKEN KNIFE.

SCHOOL commenced again the beginning of the week; but Ernest was not in
his place. He was a good scholar, obedient to the rules of the school,
and therefore a great favorite With his teacher.

"Henry Drake, do you know why Ernest Monroe isn't here?" she asked,
when the class to which he belonged came out to recite.

"He's sick, ma'am."

"I must go and see him," said the teacher.

After recess, she learned the story as it was told by Henry to the
scholars.

"Ernest stole father's keys, unlocked his tool chest, and cut his hand
with a new adze."

"That does not sound true. I wont believe such a story till Ernest
tells me himself," said the lady. "I'll call at Mrs. Monroe's on my way
home."

She did call; and Henry, who saw her enter the house, slunk away
feeling very much like a thief.

The next half hour was a very pleasant one to the sick boy. He frankly
confessed to his teacher his fault; but when she asked who unlocked the
chest, answered,—

"Mother knows. I'd rather not tell anybody else."

"Well," said the lady, rising at last to leave. "You must hurry and get
well; for my first class miss you sadly. Can't you have your books at
home, and keep up with the lessons?"

"Yes, ma'am. I should like it. Mother can hear me every day."

At the end of a fortnight, Ernest was in his desk, looking rather thin
to be sure, but pleased to be back in school. His right hand hung in
a sling, and his companions were very careful the half-healed fingers
should receive no injury by their carelessness.

To the surprise of some of his class, Ernest went on with the lesson,
which happened to be review, as if he had not been absent a day. At the
close of the recitation in spelling, he unexpectedly found himself at
the head of his class.

"Mother and I had a school at home," he exclaimed joyfully to his
teacher at recess. "We took turns in hearing the class recite. She said
I was very strict."

At the end of another week, the teacher one afternoon told her pupils
to lay aside their books as she wished to talk to them.

"Two days ago," she began, "I lost a little knife, with a pearl handle.
I used it in my desk, and felt quite sure I left it here; but, after
searching in vain, outside and inside the desk, I made up my mind I had
taken it home in my pocket by mistake. I would not suspect one of my
scholars of so mean a thing as borrowing my knife without leave; and I
dared not for a moment entertain the thought that any one here would
steal from the teacher.

"I looked for it at home without success; but what was my surprise this
afternoon, when I opened my desk, to find the knife lying directly
before me, the blade broken so badly that it was useless!"

She held up the knife, while her eye glanced rapidly from one scholar
to another.

All were very curious; some expressed indignation at the deed; but no
one seemed particularly moved except Ernest Monroe. His usually pale
cheeks were dyed with blushes, while tears trembled in his eyes, and he
covered his face.

"What can it mean," thought the teacher. "I'm sure Ernest is not the
guilty one; and yet he looks so embarrassed."

"Can any of you tell me how my knife came to be broken?" asked Miss
Fosdick. "I will readily forgive the offender if she or he will
confess. It is a wicked thing to steal; don't add to the sin by a lie.
Come up to the desk bravely, and tell me the whole truth."

No one moved, but several of the scholars noticed how much Ernest tried
to hide his confusion. He opened and shut his desk, and held his face
closely over his books.

"Don't he look guilty?" whispered Henry Drake, touching his companion
under the seat.

"Ernest," Miss Fosdick said at last, "have you nothing to say to me?"

"No, ma'am." And then, to the surprise of the whole school, the little
boy began to cry, sobbing as if his heart would break.

Ernest was known to be a favorite. Most of his companions thought he
deserved to be so; but now there were whisperings among the older boys,—

"Oh, if Ernest Monroe took the knife, nothing will be said about it.
Miss Fosdick is partial to him."

The teacher knew very well what was said; and, though her heart ached
sadly, she resolved to treat Ernest exactly as she would have treated
his cousin had he been the thief.



CHAPTER VI.

SEARCH FOR THE LIAR.

"I AM more pained than I can express," she said, glancing at the desk
where the face of Ernest was hidden on his arms; "but there is still
opportunity to confess."

Every breath was hushed, but the sobbing boy did not speak.

"Ernest Monroe," said Miss Fosdick, growing very pale, "rise in your
seat."

Ernest obeyed, though his sobs shook his whole frame.

"I have never known you tell a lie. I will trust you now. Did you take
my knife from my desk and return it here with a broken blade?"

For one moment Ernest uncovered his face.

"No, ma'am, I never touched your knife; I didn't know it was broken
till you showed it to us."

"I believe you," she said, earnestly. "A boy who always has told the
truth, deserves to be believed. You may all return to your lessons.
Henry Drake, you may remain after school."

It was noticed by all that Henry's face was as red as Ernest's had been.

One of the scholars presently held up his hand for permission to speak
to the teacher about his lesson. She went directly to his desk, and, as
she passed Henry's seat, she heard him say, in a hurried whisper,—

"If you tell anything about me, Ernest, I'll cut your hand worse than
it was before."

Half an hour before school was dismissed, Ernest asked leave to go
home, as his head ached badly.

"Yes," was the reply; "and I advise you to lie down till I call, which
will be soon after school."

Henry Drake stood before his teacher when school was dismissed, and
tried to look careless and indifferent; but she could plainly see marks
of guilt.

"Did you take my knife, Henry?" asked the teacher.

"No, ma'am!"

"Don't gaze at the floor now; look me full in the eye. You know there
is One who sees into your heart. Can you say, before Him, that you have
never touched my knife; that you know nothing how it came broken?"

"I don't see why you want to ask me so many questions," grumbled the
boy, beginning to cry. "I told you I didn't know anything about it; but
you wont believe me. You wont believe anybody but Ernest."

"I need not tell you, why I can't believe your word, Henry; your own
conscience will tell you that. I do believe Ernest, because I know that
he loves his Saviour, and would not grieve him by committing so great a
sin as to tell a falsehood. If you have done nothing wrong, why did you
threaten your cousin, in such a cruel manner, if he told anything about
you?"

Henry started, but presently muttered,—

"He's always telling something to get me into trouble."

"No," answered the teacher, "that is not true. Ernest did not tell
your father that you stole the keys of his tool chest. He has told me
nothing about my knife, though I think that he knows something about
it. He was willing to bear all the suspicions of the scholars rather
than charge another with the crime. It would be much better for you
to confess, Henry. I would forgive you, even now. If, after all your
denial, I find you have been the thief and liar, too, I shall make a
serious affair of it."

For a moment the boy hesitated. Conscience said, "Confess."

"I got out of the other scrape by sticking to my lie," he said to
himself. So he repeated the words,—

"I never touched your knife."

"You may go," said the teacher, sternly. "I don't know whether you have
told the truth; but God does. He is a God of truth; and he says all
liars shall be punished."

Do you suppose Henry was happy as he walked home? Do you think he
whistled, and smiled with pleasant thoughts; that he longed to see his
mother and tell her all that had passed? No, he did nothing of all
this. He walked slowly, with his head down, wondering, after his threat
to Ernest, whether he would dare tell his mother what he knew about the
knife.

At last, as he was going into the gate to his own home, he saw Miss
Fosdick was just behind him. Without stopping to think what she would
imagine, he darted away, and, running into the barn, hid himself among
the hay.



CHAPTER VII.

THE UNHAPPY LIAR.

ERNEST was not lying down. He sat in a rocking chair, his head resting
on his hand. He smiled when he saw his teacher, and asked her to sit
down.

"Mother has gone into Uncle Drake's. She will be back in a minute," he
said.

"I came to see you, Ernest. I think, though you haven't touched my
knife, you can tell me something about it."

Blushes dyed the boy's cheeks, as he answered,—

"I told mother, and she says ought to tell you."

His lips quivered as he added, "I didn't think you'd believe I had
taken it."

"You can never imagine how much pain I felt when I feared temptation
had proved too powerful for you. But you see what a good thing it is to
be known as a truthful boy. I then believed your word, as I do now."

"I was coming home with Henry," began Ernest, "and I saw him have a
beautiful knife. He said he had found it, and was going to keep it. I
thought he was telling the truth, till he tried to make me promise not
to tell. Then I was afraid there was something wrong. I told him, if
he knew whose it was, he ought to carry it back. I didn't see it again
till you held it up in school."

"And are you not afraid Henry will carry out his threat, and cut you
worse than he did before?"

"Mother has gone in to see Uncle John about that."

"Well, I'm going in there, too. It is time for me to tell his parents
what a bad influence he exerts in the school. Unless he repents, and
asks forgiveness, I cannot allow him to go back. We must have no
thieves nor liars there."

Unfortunately Mr. Drake had gone to a town at some distance, for a
load of lumber, and, was not expected home until late. Mrs. Drake
invited the teacher into the parlor, and seemed greatly distressed
when listening to the account of her son's bad conduct. She said, her
husband would be very angry, both with Henry and with her, for keeping
from him what she knew about the keys.

Miss Fosdick left a message for Mr. Drake, that Henry could not attend
school till he had made a confession of his sin.

When Mr. Monroe came home to supper, and learned the disgraceful story,
he started from his chair in great excitement, exclaiming,—

"Henry ought to be sent to the Reform School. If he goes on so, he will
come to the gallows. If he dares lay a finger on you, Ernest, I'll have
him put there. John may fume and rage as much as he will. I've borne
all that I shall from his family."

"Mary Anne feels dreadfully," urged Mrs. Monroe. "I'm so sorry for her
sake."

"She'll feel worse yet, Jane, if nothing is done to prevent Henry from
acting so shamefully. I yielded to you against my own judgment, and let
John believe our Ernest stole his keys. I'll do so no longer."

In the evening, he went over to talk with Mary Anne.

Henry knew that his mother had heard the story of the knife. At the
supper-table, the tears trickled down her cheeks, and once she said,—

"O Henry! You'll break my heart if you go on so. Why can't you confess
to the teacher, and be a good boy?"

Feeling very restless and unhappy, he went up to his room early; but
soon, hearing his uncle's voice, talking in excited tones, he crept
softly down to the door where he could hear every word.

"I ought to have done it before," Mr. Monroe was saying. "John has
reason to be angry. It isn't doing as I would have him do to me. Henry
grows worse every day, and something must be done to correct his
dreadful habit of lying."

"I'm afraid John will break every bone in his body," sobbed Mary Anne.
"If it hadn't been for that, I should have told him myself about the
keys."

"Henry deserves a good thrashing," answered the clock-maker. "It may
save him from the gallows. I shall tell John we all knew he was the
guilty one, and why I consented to keep it from him for a time. You had
better tell him, too."

"I can't! I can't! You don't realize how angry he'll be; and you know
he says he'll never forgive."

Henry had heard enough. Trembling from head to foot, he crept back to
his chamber; but he did not think of going to bed.

"I'll stay here till mother goes into her room, and then I'll run off.
I know there are places enough better than this. At any rate, I wont
stay here, where they're all against me, to be half killed by father."

Stealing to the closet, with his bare feet to the floor, he soon
discovered his father's pocket-book in the same pocket where the keys
had once been, and, taking from it five dollars, all the money it
contained, he wrapped it in a paper, and lay down in his clothes.

"I know mother wont tell father a word about it to-night," he said, his
teeth chattering, "and I'll be off before he's up. He said he shouldn't
be at home till eleven, 'cause the moon wouldn't rise till late; so it
will be light for me to run away."



CHAPTER VIII.

THE LIAR REFORMED.

"WHY don't Henry come down to his breakfast?" asked Mr. Drake, in a
petulant tone.

"I'll call him now," answered the mother, with a sigh, starting for
Henry's chamber.

She saw her brother-in-law coming toward the house, and trembled with
fear of her husband's anger.

"You have some excellent lumber out before the shop," remarked Mr.
Monroe, coming in and taking his seat.

"I had to give a good deal more for it than it's worth," grumbled
the carpenter; "my wheel broke down, too, and I never got home till
midnight."

"I'm sorry; but it's most time I was at the factory, and I have
something to say to you."

At first Mr. Drake went on eating, as if nothing his brother could say
would be worse than his last night's misfortunes. But presently he
dropped his knife and fork, his face growing whiter and whiter with
rage.

All this time Mrs. Drake had not come down from Henry's chamber, which
she had found empty.

Now her husband rose, and going to the foot of the stairs called out,—

"Mary Anne, come down. I want you quick; and if Henry knows what is
good for himself, he'll be here in no time."

"Wife," said he, when she came in, looking haggard and frightened at
her son's disappearance; "Monroe says you knew all the time that Henry
stole the keys from my pocket; that you heard him at it. Is that true?"

"I didn't know what he was going to do with the keys," she said,
apologizing.

"And Jane heard Ernest plead with the young scamp, to confess it to
me; and he refused because, as he said, I'd half kill him. I was the
only one to be deceived,—I, the father of the boy. Well, you'll all see
that I am not a man to cover up my child's fault. I'll give Henry the
cowhide till he repents of that job."

"Stop," exclaimed Mr. Monroe. "You must know the whole. Lying, as I
always said, hardens the heart more than anything else. Henry felt
so pleased at not being found out in that thing, that he stole his
teacher's knife from her desk, and then, before the whole school,
while Ernest was crying for his cousin's fault, he pointed at him as
the guilty one. Miss Fosdick heard Henry whisper a threat,—if he dared
tell of him, he'd cut him worse than before. There's a boy who must be
stopped short in his career, or he will come to an untimely end."

"Henry," called out Mr. Drake, angrily. "Wife, if you're keeping the
boy back, it will be the worse for him and for you, too. Tell him to
come here this instant."

"I don't know where he is, John. I've been to his room, and he isn't
there; and I wont deceive you any more. He's taken all the money out of
your pocket-book; I found it empty on the table." And, wholly overcome
with her emotions, she fell into a chair, covering her face with her
hands.

There was a flash in the father's eye and a paleness about his mouth,
as he strode toward the barn to harness his horse, which alarmed Mr.
Monroe.

"Brother John," he said, "from the bottom of my heart I pity you. But
don't be hasty; don't do anything in your anger that you will be sorry
for. Kindness will do more for Henry than anything else. Ask yourself,
'Have I done my duty by my child? Have I taught him as I should?'"

The harness dropped from Mr. Drake's hand, the hardness faded out of
the father's face, and, turning to his brother, he said, in a subdued
tone,—

"Monroe, you've a right to upbraid me for my harsh talk about Ernest.
Why don't you do it? Well, if it's no time now for reproach, when my
heart is breaking, I'll take your advice about the boy. Shall I go or
stay?"

"Stay, and let him come home. There is no danger of his going far."

Two, three days passed, days of agony to the mother, and of remorse to
both. Mr. Drake almost regretted having taken Mr. Monroe's advice, and
determined, if nothing was heard from the boy the next day, to start
off in search of him.

Late that night, the mother was awakened by a noise under her window.
She threw up the sash, when Henry's voice pleaded,—

"O mother! Do let me in. I'm sick and so hungry."

"Lie down, wife; it is better that I should go to him."

[Illustration: "COME IN, MY POOR BOY."]

Henry shrank back when he saw his father.

"Come in, my poor boy," said the man, putting out his hand, "come in."

He led the wondering child to the stove, where he soon kindled a fire,
then went to the closet and brought out the best food it contained.

Henry ate a little and began to cry.

"I'm sorry, father. I'll take the greatest whipping you'll give me, if
you'll only let me come home. I stole your keys, and your money, too,
and I broke teacher's knife."

"I know it all, my son," said the father. "When I first heard it, I
should have whipped you till one of us dropped. I'm glad you was not
here. I've forgiven you now, and so has your mother, and poor, abused
Ernest. All we want is that you'll begin from this time to be an
obedient, truthful boy; and I'll try, with God's help, to be a better
father to you than I have ever been before. Now go in and kiss your
dear mother, and hurry off to bed."

"Oh, what a load is lifted off my mind!" exclaimed Mr. Drake, when
Henry had gone to his chamber. "He's come to his senses, for he
confessed right off, and it seems that I have just come to mine."



CHAPTER IX.

CONCLUSION.

THE next day Henry commenced life anew. What do you suppose was the
first thing he did? I will tell you. He went to the school, knocked
timidly at the door, and told the teacher he wanted to speak to her a
minute. There was something in his face which convinced her that he was
a penitent boy. So she said kindly,—

"Wait till I dismiss the class in spelling; and I will come to you."

Henry waited nearly ten minutes. I will not deny that he trembled a
good deal as he thought of telling her all he had done; and once he
said to himself,—

"I can't do it! She'll tell the scholars, and they'll all despise me."

But the remembrance of her kind voice, as she said, "Wait a minute,"
decided him to remain and bravely confess his guilt.

"I did steal your knife," he exclaimed, as she appeared; "I broke it,
too; and then, when it was of no use, I put it back. I didn't feel
happy, and that made me cross to Ernest; and I told ever so many lies,
and I'm just as sorry as I can be."

The teacher gazed at his eyes, blinded with the big tears he was trying
to keep back. She saw that his lip quivered. She heard his broken
voice, and she knew that he was really sorry for his sins.

"My dear Henry," she began, "I forgive you heartily, and I feel more
encouraged about you now than I ever did before."

Do you think Henry was happy now?

Do you think he refused when she asked him to come in to his seat
while she told the school? No, indeed.

And if ever after, he was tempted to lie, he called to mind the
dreadful days he had passed away from home, and prayed his heavenly
Father to help him always to be an obedient, truthful child.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHEST OF TOOLS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


