The Project Gutenberg eBook of Prize of the air
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Prize of the air

Author: Ben Conlon

Release date: July 26, 2024 [eBook #74130]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: The Frank A. Munsey Company

Credits: Roger Frank and Sue Clark


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRIZE OF THE AIR ***


PRIZE OF THE AIR

By Ben Conlon


At a height of about two thousand feet Bill Barlow completed the loop
and then flew into the wind over the landing “T”.

“Great stuff!” yelled his passenger, and Bill could hear his chuckle,
for he had now throttled his motor and was making a quick bank to the
left.

“Thought you’d like it,” he called back, “but it may get me in wrong
down below.”

After making a complete circle, he landed just where he had intended to,
and taxied up toward the hangars. It was a maneuver he had learned
thoroughly years before, when he was a cadet flyer--this landing with a
dead engine.

Bill’s passenger was smiling as he unbuckled his safety belt and climbed
from the cockpit, but there was no smile on the face of the field
superintendent who came running up to the plane.

“Hey, what’s the idea, Barlow?” he queried. “You know as well as I do
that it’s against the law to loop with a passenger, don’t you?”

“That’s right.”

“You bet it’s right! Then why did you do it?”

“Boss,” said Bill Barlow, showing his sound teeth in a wide grin, “Mr.
Saxton here, my passenger, has some red blood in his veins. He offered
me five hundred dollars to loop the loop with him. You know that
temptation is the one thing I can’t resist, and--well, Mr. Saxon’s got
plenty of jack, and if I didn’t do it he’d have found some one who
would, and I just happened to need the five hundred very badly right
now.”

“Well, I’ve got nothing against you personally, Barlow,” said the
superintendent, which was probably true, for very few people had
anything against the likable Barlow. “But either I’m here to see that
the rules of this field are kept, or I’m not. You fellows are getting
too skittish around here. I’ll have your license as a passenger pilot
revoked.”

As a matter of fact, he did have Bill’s license revoked. Friendship in
private life is one thing; in aviation, as in the army, it is quite
another when it interferes with vested authority.

But Bill Barlow didn’t seem to mind. A man who can laugh in the face of
death is not to be disturbed by such a trifle as the revocation of a
license. It was Saxton, his passenger, who seemed the more concerned. He
approached Bill later that afternoon.

“I think I’ve got a job for you, Barlow,” he said. “I’ve got to start
tomorrow for my home in Pampa, New Mexico, and trains are getting too
slow for me in my old age. How about flying me there? I’ll buy the gas
and pay you for the trip.”

Bill looked at him wistfully, and shook his head.

“You’re hitting me right where I live,” he said dolefully. “An old pal
of mine, Jack Harraden, is barnstorming down that way, and I’d like to
join him. If I could make connections with Harraden I’d be set for the
season. More than once Jack and I have gone through a season together
stunting at fairs and carnivals--and I’d like to make the dough, too.
But you know I can’t go.”

“And why not? Seems an ideal arrangement to me. And, by the way, when I
left Pampa, your friend Harraden was part of a carnival at Las Vegas,
according to the papers.”

“Las Vegas, eh? Well, I might join him. But I couldn’t carry you, now
that my passenger license is revoked.”

Saxton laughed. “I’ll fix that for you, boy! I’ll buy your plane. Give
you two thousand dollars for it. You ride with me technically as a
passenger, but you’re hired to do what you’re told to do--and you’ll be
at the joy-stick. Get the idea?”

Bill got the idea, and the transaction was duly carried out.

“Remember,” Saxton warned him, as he pocketed the dummy bill-of-sale.
“I’ve ‘bought’ that plane. I have you at my mercy now. I may charge you
plenty when you want to get it back--and get the free ride into the
bargain.”

“Fair enough!” Bill chuckled. “But you haven’t got it all your own way,
Mr. Wise Guy. Don’t be surprised if I suddenly decide to quit piloting
the ship when we’re five thousand feet above a Kansas farm and take to
parachute stunts unless you come to time with me.”

So Bill Barlow and Frank C. Saxton, since they could laugh with each
other and threaten to do each other, knew that they were friends, and
the next day Bill Barlow had his ship ready for the long jump.

Saxton wished to arrive at Pampa, where he operated a cattleman’s bank,
as soon as possible, he explained, as a shipment of gold bullion was due
in Pampa that week from a correspondent bank in Trinidad, Colorado. He
wanted to be on the ground when the transfer was made.

He rode out to the field in a taxicab accompanied by a slender,
gray-eyed girl who looked trim and athletic in a heavy blue jersey and
knickers.

“Think she’s dressed warm enough for the hop?” Saxton asked, his shrewd
eyes twinkling. “I forgot to mention yesterday that my daughter is going
along. This is Mr. Barlow, Ruth. He’s the fellow that looped the loop
with your dad yesterday.”

Ruth extended her hand boyishly, and Bill may have held it just a trifle
too long, but the act was unconscious.

“The more I see of you bankers, Mr. Saxton,” he said, turning to the
gray-haired man, “the less I value your keenness in a business deal
despite your reputation. If I’d known Miss Saxton was coming along, I’d
have piloted you for nothing.”

And the remark may not have been entirely jocular. Hours later, flying
high above the fields of Ohio, Bill Barlow somehow could not develop
that devil-may-care feeling that he always had in the air.

He had done his share of stunt-flying and had never known fear of any
kind, but right now there was a certain conscious concern within him
which he could not analyze. He finally doped out what the matter was.

It was the precious freight he was carrying. Those straight-gazing gray
eyes of Ruth Saxton had nearly sunk Bill Barlow.

A single stop was made, at the air mail field at Maywood, Illinois, for
refueling; then the flight was continued, and completed without special
incident, Bill Barlow making a landing in a field just east of the town
of Pampa.

He had never been in the Southwest before, and he was eagerly
anticipating the surprise he had in store for Jack Harraden. Two planes
in a New Mexico town would be something of a sensation, he assumed.

That day he enjoyed an old-fashioned noonday dinner at the comfortable
home of the Saxtons, and telephoned Las Vegas. The city authorities,
Saxton had said, could doubtless enlighten him as to the activities of
his friend Harraden.

But the news he received proved to be a keen disappointment. Harraden
had been flying passengers in Las Vegas, but had hopped off in his De
Haviland two days before, saying that he was going to Beaumont, Texas.

“Me for Beaumont, then,” said Bill, “I’m beginning to vegetate already,
with nothing to do.”

Ruth Saxton lowered her eyes. She was not the type to be forward. If
this good-looking chap chose to hop off for Beaumont, then that was his
business, she supposed.

And Frank C. Saxton said nothing. He had liked Barlow on sight, but he
himself was in the banking business and this young daredevil would never
be satisfied with that. And Bill himself was thinking that he might
better have been in some game like banking as the husband of a gray-eyed
girl like--

Oh, well, he’d hop off for Beaumont in the morning.

But he did not hop off for Beaumont in the morning. For something
happened that night to keep him from Beaumont. As a matter of strict
record, to this day he has never seen Beaumont.




II


Barlow borrowed one of Saxton’s cayuses to take a lope into the hills.
He would have invited Ruth along, but then he was not sure that Ruth
would be interested, and anyhow he realized that he did not cut a very
expert figure on a horse.

Hard work, too, this horseback riding. He realized it more and more as
the sun gradually sank behind the ridge to the west of the town. He had
been walking beside his mount along the trail, but with darkness
approaching he decided to try once more to ride, despite his soreness.

Saxton would probably be wondering what had become of him. Dusk had
fallen with unexpected swiftness here in the mountains, and he was none
too sure of the trail.

It was as he was rounding a curve from where he hoped to be able to see
the fork leading into Pampa that he heard a sound that could not
possibly be mistaken--by Bill Barlow. He had heard that sound too often
to make any mistake about it.

That subdued roar was the pounding of twelve cylinders all right enough.
He’d have bet a million dollars on it--if he had had it.

He gazed up into the violescent dusk. The roar was getting louder now,
and sure enough, over the ridge from out of the north swooped a great
shadow that circled about and made a landing in the hill-rimmed meadow
just below him to the right.

“Jack Harraden!” he said to himself, “He must have heard I was in
Pampa.”

Bill Barlow forgot all about the trail into town now. He took the first
path that led downward, tied his tired beast to a fence-post and started
afoot cross-country in the darkness, guided by the roar of the plane’s
engine as it taxied along the ground.

He continued on, the soft ground serving as a pad for his feet. He heard
the sound of men’s voices after a considerable walk, and he was about to
call out when he discovered that the men were wrangling over something.
He could not make out the words, but there was no mistaking the
intonation.

Some sixth sense caused him to stoop in the shelter of the fence that
inclosed a large field with an overhanging hill at one corner it. He
could distinguish the outline of the plane there in the gloom, its wings
looking ghostlike and mysterious, and from the loud voices he could tell
that the men were walking in his direction.

Some of the talk was in Spanish, and he got a word of it here and there.
Bill had taken Spanish two years at college--and had become very fluent
in football.

He caught the words “Pancho Lopez” and “dinero,” which he knew meant
money. Then, to his satisfaction, a new voice boomed out in English:

“Yeh, he’s big chief--down there. But I’m boss up here until this thing
is put over, Ramos, and don’t ever forget it!”

There was a sullen response in Spanish, too low in tone for Bill to make
it out.

“That’s all right,” came the first man’s voice again. “That third plane
stays in the hills. You never can tell what might happen. Them armored
cars could pick us off up there in the air with the right breaks.”

Bill Barlow lay prone beside the fence as the men--there seemed to be
four of them--passed within a few feet of him. One of them had a holster
strapped at his side and wore a cartridge belt.

He seemed to be the leader, and he was raking down the untractable Ramos
who had evidently ventured to irritate him with some rash suggestion.
His voice trailed off as the group walked toward a dark smudge a hundred
yards or so away which Bill thought might be a cabin.

“An armored car!” Could there be any connection? Saxton had told him
that afternoon that he wished him to remain in Pampa in order to meet
his son, who was coming down with the bullion shipment from Trinidad in
an armored car.

Bill Barlow waited until there was no sound from the cabin, if that was
what it was, then leaped the fence and crept toward the airplane. No
watchman had been left on guard, and Bill believed the mysterious
aviators might return at any moment.

On the far side of the plane he risked a flash from his torch, and then
snapped it off quickly.

The ship was a De Haviland painted green. In front of the pilot’s seat
was mounted a machine gun. Bill thought he recognized the type and that
it was synchronized to shoot between the blades of the propeller.

At any rate, it was a weird sight on an airplane in peace time in a New
Mexico meadow.

He did not risk another flash, but scurried away in the darkness, and
somehow found his way to his tethered horse. When he finally reached the
Saxton home it was almost dawn, and he rapped on the window that he knew
to be Saxton’s.

In a couple of minutes the banker, pyjama-clad, stuck his head out.

“What the devil’s up?” he asked, sleepily. “Where were you, Bill?”

“I’ll tell you all that later,” Bill replied. “Meanwhile, I’ll ask you
one. What time is your son starting from Trinidad in that armored car?”

“Who? Ted? Why, he may have started by this time. First streak of
daylight they’ll shove off. Roads’ll be clearer then, and what folks
don’t see won’t bother ’em.” Saxton kindled a cigar, and gave vent to
his rumbling laugh. “Why? You’re not worrying about that, are you? That
type of armored car could stand off an army, boy.”

“I suppose so. But, Saxton, I want you to do something right away. Get
Trinidad on the phone. If your son hasn’t started, tell him to wait till
tomorrow. Make it emphatic. It may be very important. If he has started,
get one of the towns this side of Trinidad, and see that the car is held
there. Now do that. Be sure. Will you, Saxton?”

The banker looked at him keenly.

“There’s something up, I can see that,” he said. “But I think you’re
getting upset over a trifle. Those armored cars, you know--”

“Yes, I know,” Bill cut in.

Should he mention his discovery to Saxton? He might be on the wrong
track entirely. The armed plane might possibly be one of the exhibits
from the recent Las Vegas carnival.

At any rate, only he himself could be of any possible service now, if
the car had started from Trinidad. No use worrying Saxton and Ruth, he
decided.

He waited until he heard Saxton at the telephone asking for long
distance to Trinidad, and then grabbing up a rifle and several rounds
from a little den-like hunting room which Saxton had furnished off of
the living-room, he remounted his horse and galloped along the road to
the east of the town, and, just as dawn streaked the sky, reached his
plane.

A few minutes later he had turned the horse loose to graze, and had
hopped off, the nose of his old Jenny pointed toward Trinidad.

As he sailed along he wondered if he was on a useless quest. He might
be.

In the first place, there was a possibility that his suspicions were not
well founded. Then Saxton might be able to get Trinidad before the
armored car started, and could head it off.

But as he flew along he almost hoped that he was in for action. For that
was the way with Bill Barlow. Fellow war aces had said that he “fattened
on trouble.”

And, if that was the case, there was enough trouble ahead to make Bill
Barlow very fat indeed.




III


Bill flew straight north for awhile and had no difficulty picking up the
Trinidad road which wound about the foothills rimming Pampa to the
north. After he had skimmed over the hills he swung lower in order to
scout the highway thoroughly.

He passed over a couple of little settlements and climbed to a higher
altitude, for there was mountainous country ahead. It was after he had
climbed high and had sailed over the summit that he made out a
low-flying plane ahead.

He used his binoculars--the plane was the green De Haviland of the night
before, as he had suspected it would be. But the hawk would wait for its
prey in vain if Saxton’s telephone call had been in time. And then, as
he zoomed along, he saw that he was in for action.

A turreted car of the type used by banks to transport money and bullion
swept around a hairpin turn in the road that hugged a steep bluff, and
as soon as the car had swung into the straight road Bill saw a grayish
cloud shoot up just ahead of the car. It looked to him as if a bomb had
been dropped; and yet it did not seem possible from the position of the
green plane.

Bill Barlow put on all speed, and tilted his aërilons to climb. He was
planning to get above the green plane and keep it below and in front of
him where he would be safe from that machine gun nested in front of the
pilot.

In this manner he might be able to take the joy-stick between his knees,
get a pot-shot at the pilot, and send the green ship down out of
control. It was a long chance, but it was his only one, and Bill Barlow
had fought against long odds before.

He hardly believed he was seen as yet, and he nosed up steadily toward a
low-hanging cloud. And then, as he climbed, he noticed, backgrounded
against the cloud, another plane--a big blue-gray one, that seemed
almost to blend into the cloud. This, then, was probably the explanation
of that explosion that had taken place in front of the armored car.

The second plane was far above him, and, although his own ship was a
good climber, Barlow realized that it would be useless now to try to get
above the blue-gray plane. He would have to take one chance and wait
until it dived.

The blue-gray plane had sighted him now, and he maneuvered as it started
down after him. The man at the machine gun was trying to get Barlow from
the rear; but that game was only too familiar to Bill.

His mind went back over ten years to glorious jousts above the lines,
and almost instinctively he changed his course by a sharp turn to the
right. The blue-gray plane followed him, its pilot still trying
feverishly to get Barlow in front of him--which is just what Bill Barlow
had no intention of letting him do.

Since he himself had no machine gun, there was no offensive advantage in
getting to the rear himself, but there was a strong advantage
defensively. If he kept on the tail of the other machine he would be
able to spike that machine gun.

Around and around circled the planes in this carousel of death, for that
was what it was, Bill Barlow knew, although just at present there were
no wars nor rumors of wars. Below them on the slopes cattle grazed
peacefully, but here in the air was the seed of death.

He must not let that gray plane take him from the rear. Both of the
ships were steadily losing altitude, but Bill knew the possibilities of
his own plane, and he might lure the enemy until it got too low to
maneuver, and it might crash.

He was pretty low himself now, as he circled about. He started to dash
and zig-zag--anything to get out of the path of that machine gun. And
yet he had to get out of the circle to climb. He’d try it.

It was a few minutes after this, just as he had reached a safer altitude
and once more tried to get on the tail of the gray, that a spray of
machine gun bullets pinged against the wires of his ship. But he was in
the strategic position that he wished now. With the joy-stick between
his knees, he flew slightly above the enemy plane and shouldered his
rifle. It spoke, and the pilot of the gray plane let go of the joy-stick
and placed his hands to his side. Then the gray plane seemed to leap and
swerve and turn, fell into a nose dive and went out of control.

As he tried to bank and make now for the green ship, Bill Barlow
realized that he had not escaped unscathed. His own plane careened
sharply, and at first he feared that his control wires had been shot
away. Probably not, though--the ship still took direction, if rather
awkwardly.

He could still make a landing if he kept the ship’s nose up, although he
knew that now he had been put out of the engagement. Still keeping the
nose of his plane up, he sailed along over a little ridge and managed to
make a hazardous landing in a cleared space.

As he snapped out his pliers and feverishly tried to repair the damaged
wire braces, he was wondering what was happening over the ridge. He
heard a couple of explosions, and then the sharper report of rifle
shots, probably from the armored car. A few minutes later, while still
working on the damaged wire, he heard the roar of the green plane’s
engine, and, looking up, saw it passing over him, and a spray of machine
gun bullets splashed against the bowlder to his left.

Bill grabbed his rifle and ran to the shelter of the bowlder, but the
green plane paid no further attention to him. It sailed away to the
northeast. Evidently the men in its cockpit had made their haul from the
armored car and were making away with it, and had decided to leave well
enough alone.

With his wire braces repaired, Bill once more took off, circled and
climbed, and skimmed back over the ridge. The armored car, he could see
now, was toppled over on its side in the road.

A few rods from the spot the blue-gray plane was crumpled up like a
great wounded bird. Bill picked out a suitable landing place, throttled
his motor and volplaned down. Then he ran back to the road, passing the
gray plane on the way. The dead pilot of the gray plane sat half upright
in a weird position, his head to one side. The legs of another man
protruded from the wreckage. A little mustached man was beside the
plane, circling about it queerly and jabbering away and feeling his
head.

“Knocked goofy,” said Bill to himself. “Well, two of ’em are dead, and
that little bozo seems cuckoo. He can wait.”

He continued toward the sagging armored car. The uniformed bodies of two
men, evidently guards, lay sprawled beside the car. One of them still
had a rifle cradled in his arms.

The driver, although wounded, was trying to crawl down from the seat,
and a fourth figure, a blond young man, sent a charge from an automatic
whistling over Bill’s head, evidently believing that, since he came in a
plane, he was another of the stick-up men.

Bill threw himself to the ground.

“Hey! Lay off that!” he yelled. “I’m here to help you. I recognize you
from your father. You’re Ted Saxton, aren’t you?”

“Yes.” There was doubt in young Saxton’s voice.

“Well, I know your father. No use taking after that green plane now. You
and the driver there seem to be in bad shape. I’ll take you in my ship
to the sanatorium at Valmora, where you can get treatment. And one of
those birds in the gray wreck there seems to be moving. He does not
deserve it, but I’ll take him along.”

He crossed back to the wrecked gray plane. The small man with the
mustache was still circling about, jabbering in Spanish. He showed no
injury, but he had probably been creased badly by the fall.

He looked blankly out his black eyes when Barlow questioned him, and
Bill suddenly seized and shouldered him like a sack of barley, and
dumped him into the cockpit of his plane. A few moments later, with the
injured Saxton and the driver as comfortable as possible under the
circumstances, he was winging along toward the sanatorium at Valmora,
the peaked roof of which he could see in the distance.

He made a landing, left his cargo of casualties there, and speeded back
to Pampa.

“But Ted! Is he hurt badly?” asked Ruth, when he had told his remarkable
story.

“Oh, I know he’ll be all right, Miss Saxton. A fragment of a grenade
struck him in the head. The doctors at Valmora say they’ll patch him up
all right. I’m not sure about the driver. He stopped a bullet in the
side.”

“Oh, I must get to Ted!” Ruth exclaimed. “Come on, dad. We’ll fly to
Valmora with Mr. Barlow.”

Saxton put in a quick telephone call to the police to scour the hills
north of Pampa.

“I’m afraid they’ll have a tough time,” he said, as he pulled on a cap
and hurried toward the plane with Bill and his daughter. “That’s the
first time there’s been an air stick-up in New Mexico. But if Ted’s all
right, I don’t even mind about the bullion.”

Bill’s plane had proceeded about twelve miles in the direction of
Valmora when Ruth, gazing through the binoculars, made out a plane
coming from the mountains in the northwest.

“I’ll make a landing,” Bill suggested, “and let you out, Miss Saxton.
Then probably I can climb above it, and--”

But Miss Saxton was of quite another mind.

“Indeed, you will not!” she cut in. “I’m not a bit afraid. You get above
them, and I’ll keep below the cowl of the machine and pot those
murderers. If you could do it alone, I ought to be able to do something
now. I was on the rifle team at Vassar, you know.”

Bill climbed steadily, and as the green plane flew nearer, swooped down
to the rear and kept on its tail. As he passed within twenty feet of it
there was a report back of him, and then another report, and still
another.

The green plane seemed to stagger in the air. Its fuel tank had been
perforated by the bullets, and the pilot had turned to gesticulate
wildly to one of the men back of him.

It was then that, as Bill flew alongside, but a trifle in the rear to
keep out of range of the machine gun, that Ruth drew a steady bead and
fired again. The pilot threw up his hands.

A second member of the green plane started to reach for the joy-stick.
There was another report from Bill’s plane, and the great green De
Haviland spiraled down dizzily.

Ten minutes later Bill Barlow, with Ruth and her father, had made a
landing and were running toward the crushed green ship, Bill put out his
hand and barred Ruth’s progress. He knew that it was not a pretty sight
that would meet their eyes, for the ship had caught fire, and even as
they ran forward there was an explosion.

The three men of the green plane’s crew were dead, and two of them were
badly burned. There was no sign of the bullion. A box of grenades had
toppled out from the plane when it careened in the air, and had
miraculously not exploded.

Bill gathered them up and handed them to Saxton.

“We’d better keep ’em,” he said. “No telling but that they might come in
handy on a day like this. I think these birds must have a cache
somewhere up there in the mountains, and I have an idea. We’d better
hotfoot it to Valmora and get something out of that injured Mex if we
can. He didn’t seem badly hurt, but he might pop off.”

At Valmora, the Mexican, whose name proved to be Pedro Cesar, had made a
quick recovery. He was on his feet in the ward, but under guard.

Bill drew him aside.

“There’s one chance for you, Cesar,” he said. “It’s up to you what you
want to do. You know your pals abandoned you this morning. They could
have taken you, couldn’t they? Now I want to get some information out of
you.”

The little Mexican surveyed him out of sullen black eyes.

“Me, I am no traitor,” he replied. “I fly weeth Villa. I am gentleman.”

“Then your friends are traitors,” Bill informed him. “You know what they
did? They flew back over that crashed gray plane about an hour ago, and
fired into the bodies they found there. You know why? They thought some
of their pals might have been alive, and they didn’t want to share that
gold. And they probably thought that you were one of the ones stopping
their lead. Not very nice treatment, was it? But they have been captured
by the State patrol, and by coming clean you can get free. You’d better
come through. There was murder done there--and you’re in on it.”

Pedro Cesar seemed to have fallen for the story. He broke into a series
of curses in Spanish.

“Por Dios! If they want to doubla cross me, eh? An’ go away weeth de
gol’--yes, so soon night come. How many you say they arrest--de men in
de green plane? Three? Ah--two more are in de mountains weeth another
hair-sheep. They doubla cross them too, eh? They turn what you say
State’s evidence?”

“That’s it,” Bill lied cheerfully. “They didn’t have the gold in the
green plane--but in another hour the authorities will know where it’s
cached in the mountains. Then you all get the works. Say, how did you
birds get hold of three airships?”

“Ah! That surprise you, eh?” Pedro Cesar laughed. “You have perhaps
heard of Pancho Lopez, eh--de beeg bandit chief of Sonora? Ah, I theenk
you have heard so much, yes? Pancho Lopez he have de sheeps from de ol’
Villista army, an’ he hear of de gol’ being transport from Trinidad. He
ees poor now, ol’ Pancho, yes. He weesh to make de one haul an’ take to
de hills where no one ever find him. But Pancho he be very mad now if he
not get gol’.”

“I’m afraid your friend Pancho will have to stick mad and stay mad,”
Barlow told the Mexican. “But you show me where that other plane is
cached in the hills, and you’ll get out of plenty trouble.”

“You carry me in de hair-sheep,” Pedro promised, “an’ I show you we gat
them, ver’ queek.”

“O K,” said Bill. “But I’d like a third man along, with another rifle.”

“What’s the matter with me? Am I a cripple?” Saxton interrupted. “And
don’t forget, that’s my plane you’re piloting,” he laughed.

“Maybe,” said Bill, chuckling back. “All right, get the guns, Saxton.
And we have the grenades. We’ll see if we can’t rout out those birds.
They must have the dough cached there.”

So, after a quick lunch at the sanatorium, Bill Barlow once more hopped
off, with Pedro Cesar and Saxton in the cockpit--hopped off to the
north, where Cesar claimed that his former confederates were hidden.

Saxton had orders to watch Cesar, whom Bill did not entirely trust, but
the Mexican seemed to have been converted and chastened, and as they
neared the mountains and Bill increased his altitude, he directed the
pilot to veer to the right to avoid a machine gun mounted in the robber
camp as an anti-aircraft weapon.

“Believe me, these birds have a modern organization,” said Bill. “And
look, Saxton over to the right there. See that sky-blue monoplane? By
golly, they’re getting ready to take off. And with the dough, I’ll bet.”

It seemed true enough. Here in a natural bowl made by a circular plain
and the rimming hills was a speedy-looking monoplane with its engine
already warming up. On the ground three men were gesticulating to each
other, and one of them pointed up toward Bill’s ship, whereupon all of
them ran for cover.

Bill swung over the plane and, taking precise aim, let go two of the
bombs he had taken from the wrecked gray ship. The second one seemed to
hit the monoplane squarely and tip it over on one wing.

Then Bill spiraled down in an effort to destroy the machine gun back of
the bowlder before it could be manned. Cesar pointed it out, and just as
he did so there came the quick rat-a-tat-a-tat of machine gun bullets.

Bill throttled his motor and swung to the right, then circled and made a
landing at the far end of the field.

“That other plane’s out of commission,” he said. “We want to have one
left to get away in. Down on your bellies, men, and keep to shelter.
We’ll fight this action out right down here.”

He taxied his ship behind a spur of hill out of range of the machine
gun. Then, rifle in hand, he held a quick conference with Saxton and
Cesar.

“You folks keep in shelter behind these rocks here, and draw that bozo’s
fire,” he said. “They’ve got bad medicine there, but we may be able to
outmaneuver them.”

His plan was to creep up the side trail with his rifle, and try to get
the machine gunner from the rear. Cesar had said that the gun was rigged
on a swivel, but if one of the other three men turned it back in his
direction there were plenty of rocks and bowlders behind which to take
shelter, and Saxton and Cesar could then charge from the front.

Bill made his way cautiously up the mountain trail, circled to the right
and picked his way down the slope. He found a friendly bowlder halfway
down the slope, and to his delight could make out the hat of one of the
men about the machine gun. He took careful aim and fired.

The hat disappeared, and he believed he had got his man, for one of the
others took to his heels, running up the slope which led past the
bowlder at a distance of about a hundred yards. Evidently he had not
guessed that an enemy was behind the bowlder.

Bill drew a bead on the running man’s legs, and toppled him to the
ground. But the rat-a-tat-a-tat of the machine gun broke out
occasionally, proving that the machine gunner was alive and was trying
to get the men in front of him.

Bill himself had not been discovered. He crept farther back and over to
the right. Things were going nicely. Saxton and Cesar had a good chance
if they did not show themselves too clearly, and all he had to do now
was to get that gunner.

He took to his hands and knees and had topped a little rise that he
thought would give him command of the machine gun position, when far to
the right in the rear of the gun he saw another man creeping along. He
raised his rifle and was about to fire, but then the man raised his
head, and from the cap he wore Bill could see that it was Saxton.

He stood up and waved his hat at Saxton, so that the latter might not
make the same mistake that he had almost made--fire on a friend. Saxton
waved back, and hastened toward him.

The two of them crept back of a screen of rocks, and to their delight
saw the hunched figure of the machine gunner back of the bowlder in
front of them.

“We’ll fire together,” Bill suggested. “This is too easy. Then we’ll
never know which bullet killed him.”

They fired. The man at the gun slumped forward. They waited a moment,
but he did not move again.

“Well, that’s that,” said Bill. “I think we’ve won the field.”

He had hardly finished the sentence when a bullet spatted against a rock
back of them, and another kicked up the dust at their feet. Both men
threw themselves flat on the ground.

“I guess I spoke too soon,” said Bill. “I toppled a fellow a few minutes
ago. He was running back up the trail, and I think I got him in the leg.
He must have beat it back to some retreat for a rifle, and this is the
result. Don’t show yourself, Saxton. We’ll outwait him.”

They lay there on their stomachs back of the bowlder, their rifles ready
for the first sign of the remaining bandit.

But it seemed that it was always the unexpected that was happening on
this eventful day. There was the roar of a motor below in the field.
Bill unconsciously made himself an attractive target as he sat up and
looked at Saxton sharply.

“Holy sufferin’ Moses!” he said. “That must be my ship. Maybe the third
stick-up guy, or--”

He raced down straight toward the field, Saxton on his heels. As they
passed the machine gun and its dead gunner they were just in time to see
Barlow’s machine take to the air. At the joy-stick was Pedro Cesar.

Bill stopped and sent a rifle bullet at the plane, but the ship sailed
calmly through the air, and Cesar playfully tossed a grenade over the
side. It exploded a few yards away from the bewildered men on the
ground.

“I’ll bet ten to one he’s loaded the loot from that sky-blue one,”
shouted Bill.

He streaked over to the sagging monoplane, and found that his prediction
was only too true. Pedro had also taken the box of grenades.

“My fault!” Saxton admitted. “What a dumb-bell! I should have stayed and
watched him. Now the little rat’s got away with everything.”

Saxton’s crestfallen penitence touched Bill rather humorously, despite
the circumstances.

“I guess it’s Pedro Cesar’s,” answered Saxton. “Cesar’s gold, Cesar’s
plane, and Cesar’s bank, for all I care. But believe me, if I could get
my hands on that little greaser it would be a case of ‘I’ve come to bury
Cesar,’ believe you me! What’s the matter, Bill? Something else wrong?”

Bill Barlow was looking at the sky-blue monoplane as if it was
bewitched, and as if he himself was bewitched along with it.

“Why--why--” he started. “By golly, man,” he almost shouted, “there’s
not a thing wrong with this sky-blue ship except that this control wire
is snapped. Pedro didn’t stop to examine it, the boob!” Already he was
taking out his pliers. “We’ll be up in the air in less than fifteen
minutes.”

He fixed the wire in record time, he and Saxton straightened up the
plane, pushed it back toward the machine gun bowlder for a longer
take-off, and a few seconds later the motor was whirring.

“Just a minute,” called back Bill, as he disappeared behind the bowlder.
He returned with the machine gun and started to lift it into the
cockpit.

“It won’t be rigged up as snug as my old Browning,” he explained; “but
it can shoot, and there’s a drum in it already. And this ship looks like
a lulu. If I don’t overtake that grease ball before he gets to the
border my name isn’t Lucky Bill Barlow. This toy comet ought to be able
to do a hundred and a half going backward.”

At Valmora, on the way to the border, Bill throttled his motor and began
to volplane.

“What’s the idea?” asked Saxton.

“Wait!” Bill commanded. He made the landing.

“Get out, old pal,” he told the banker. “I’m alone this time, boy. Cesar
is alone, and this is my ship, and the war is solo from this minute,
until I come back with the dough.”

He stuck out his hand and patted Saxton on the shoulder.

“So long, old pal,” he said. Then he gave ’er the gun and the sky-blue
monoplane went roaring down the field.




IV


Beneath the cottonwoods in front of the sanatorium at Valmora, Frank C.
Saxton and his daughter waited nervously. An hour elapsed. Two hours.

Saxton was shaking his head. There was concern in the gray eyes of Ruth.
Three hours. And a half.

The sun was setting behind the ridge to the west when Ruth sprang to her
feet, her gray eyes alight.

“I hear it!” she yelled. “Oh, daddy! Daddy! It must be--be Billy!”

Out of the sky to the south skimmed a sky-blue monoplane. It roared
overhead; then the plane, with a throttled motor, came into the wind and
made a quick bank to the right, and a few seconds later was bouncing
gently along the broad exercise field of the sanatorium.

As it taxied to a stop, out jumped William C. Barlow. He hailed his
friends and pointed to the cockpit.

“The bullion!” he announced proudly. “Better leave it here and set a
guard till morning. We’ll take it to Pampa in time to open the bank.”

Saxton put up the back of his hand and wiped his forehead.

“I’m getting to believe whatever you say, Bill Barlow,” he announced.
“If you say it, it must be so. But where’s the other plane--my plane?”

“Oh, yes--your plane,” mimicked Bill, grinning. “I brought it back for
you. Here it is--about the biggest part of it.” He handed Saxton a
fragment which looked like a piece of charcoal.

“That’s why it took me so long,” he explained. “I had to wait until the
darned thing burned before I could get at the bullion. But I’ve got a
ship now that makes yours look like just what it is--a pile of junk!”

“You win!” said Saxton, throwing his hands in the air in a burlesque
sign of surrender. “You could win--all the stakes--any game you play.”

“I just might take you up on that,” Bill replied, and he looked
meaningly at Ruth Saxton.

She did not drop her eyes this time. She was looking right back at him
with that straight gray gaze of hers, and her eyes said more than words
could ever express.


[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the March 17, 1928 issue of
Argosy-Allstory Weekly magazine.]





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRIZE OF THE AIR ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


